1:I[7121,[],"LoadingBoundaryProvider"]
2:"$Sreact.fragment"
3:I[9761,["500","static/chunks/500-c99b8dfd3de17c86.js","490","static/chunks/490-1323267ccb33f86e.js","177","static/chunks/app/layout-87ae2a2b73ef072c.js"],"Header"]
4:I[7121,[],""]
5:I[7460,["490","static/chunks/490-1323267ccb33f86e.js","39","static/chunks/app/error-014c8e60b963ef0c.js"],"default"]
6:I[4581,[],""]
7:I[8500,["500","static/chunks/500-c99b8dfd3de17c86.js","490","static/chunks/490-1323267ccb33f86e.js","788","static/chunks/app/taxonomy/page-3fa5013c6cc21262.js"],""]
e:I[7123,[],"default",1]
:HL["/FoodComputing/_next/static/css/5996d08dc17e37aa.css","style"]
0:{"P":null,"c":["","taxonomy",""],"q":"","i":false,"f":[[["",{"children":["taxonomy",{"children":["__PAGE__",{}]}]},"$undefined","$undefined",20],[["$","$L1",null,{"loading":[["$","div","l",{"className":"section-shell py-24","role":"status","children":[["$","div",null,{"className":"h-3 w-28 animate-pulse bg-[var(--line)]"}],["$","div",null,{"className":"mt-6 h-12 max-w-2xl animate-pulse bg-[var(--paper-deep)]"}],["$","div",null,{"className":"mt-8 h-72 animate-pulse border border-[var(--line)] bg-white/40"}],["$","span",null,{"className":"sr-only","children":"Loading research data"}]]}],[],[]],"children":["$","$2","c",{"children":[[["$","link","0",{"rel":"stylesheet","href":"/FoodComputing/_next/static/css/5996d08dc17e37aa.css","precedence":"next","crossOrigin":"$undefined","nonce":"$undefined"}]],["$","html",null,{"lang":"en","data-scroll-behavior":"smooth","children":["$","body",null,{"className":"min-h-screen","children":[["$","a",null,{"href":"#main-content","className":"fixed left-4 top-3 z-[100] -translate-y-20 bg-[var(--maroon)] px-4 py-2 text-sm font-semibold text-white focus:translate-y-0","children":"Skip to content"}],["$","$L3",null,{}],["$","main",null,{"id":"main-content","className":"min-h-[70vh]","children":["$","$L4",null,{"parallelRouterKey":"children","error":"$5","errorStyles":[],"errorScripts":[],"template":["$","$L6",null,{}],"templateStyles":"$undefined","templateScripts":"$undefined","notFound":[["$","section",null,{"className":"section-shell py-28","children":[["$","p",null,{"className":"eyebrow","children":"Record not found"}],["$","h1",null,{"className":"font-editorial mt-4 text-5xl","children":"This research record is unavailable."}],["$","p",null,{"className":"mt-5 max-w-xl text-[var(--muted)]","children":"It may have been removed from the current data export or its identifier may have changed."}],["$","$L7",null,{"href":"/incidents","children":"Return to incidents","className":"focus-ring inline-flex min-h-11 items-center justify-center gap-2 rounded-[4px] px-4 text-sm font-semibold transition-colors disabled:pointer-events-none disabled:opacity-50 bg-[var(--maroon)] text-white hover:bg-[var(--maroon-dark)] h-11 mt-8","ref":null}]]}],[]],"forbidden":"$undefined","unauthorized":"$undefined"}]}],["$","footer",null,{"className":"border-t border-[var(--line)] bg-[var(--maroon-dark)] text-white","children":[["$","div",null,{"className":"section-shell grid gap-10 py-12 md:grid-cols-[1.6fr_1fr_1fr]","children":[["$","div",null,{"children":[["$","p",null,{"className":"font-editorial text-2xl","children":"Indian Food Safety Incident Observatory"}],["$","p",null,{"className":"mt-3 max-w-xl text-sm leading-6 text-white/70","children":"A research interface connecting incident-level news evidence, official FSSAI survey baselines and a developing Indian food ontology."}]]}],["$","div",null,{"children":[["$","p",null,{"className":"text-xs font-semibold uppercase tracking-[.12em] text-[#e9bd7b]","children":"Explore"}],["$","div",null,{"className":"mt-3 grid gap-2 text-sm text-white/75","children":[["$","$L7",null,{"href":"/incidents","children":"Incident repository"}],["$","$L7",null,{"href":"/methodology","children":"Methodology"}],["$","$L7",null,{"href":"/fssai-baseline","children":"FSSAI baseline"}]]}]]}],["$","div",null,{"children":[["$","p",null,{"className":"text-xs font-semibold uppercase tracking-[.12em] text-[#e9bd7b]","children":"Attribution"}],["$","p",null,{"className":"mt-3 text-sm text-white/75","children":["Food Computing Lab",["$","br",null,{}],"Ashoka University"]}]]}]]}],["$","div",null,{"className":"border-t border-white/15","children":["$","div",null,{"className":"section-shell flex flex-col gap-2 py-5 text-xs text-white/60 sm:flex-row sm:justify-between","children":[["$","p",null,{"children":"Research prototype. Data coverage is incomplete and evolving."}],["$","p",null,{"children":"Built with open-source tools."}]]}]}]]}]]}]}]]}]}],{"children":[["$","$2","c",{"children":[null,["$","$L4",null,{"parallelRouterKey":"children","error":"$undefined","errorStyles":"$undefined","errorScripts":"$undefined","template":["$","$L6",null,{}],"templateStyles":"$undefined","templateScripts":"$undefined","notFound":"$undefined","forbidden":"$undefined","unauthorized":"$undefined"}]]}],{"children":[["$","$2","c",{"children":[[["$","section",null,{"className":"border-b border-[var(--line)] bg-[var(--white)]","children":["$","div",null,{"className":"section-shell grid gap-10 py-14 md:grid-cols-[minmax(0,1fr)_minmax(16rem,.42fr)] md:py-20","children":["$L8","$L9"]}]}],"$La"],null,"$Lb"]}],{},null,false,null]},null,false,"$@c"]},null,false,null],"$Ld",false]],"m":"$undefined","G":["$e",[]],"S":true,"h":null,"s":"$undefined","l":"$undefined","p":"$undefined","d":"$undefined","b":"3u_YqJMTf1n1xetfOB6OD"}
f:I[6278,["500","static/chunks/500-c99b8dfd3de17c86.js","490","static/chunks/490-1323267ccb33f86e.js","788","static/chunks/app/taxonomy/page-3fa5013c6cc21262.js"],"TaxonomyTree"]
93:I[484,[],"OutletBoundary"]
94:"$Sreact.suspense"
97:I[484,[],"ViewportBoundary"]
99:I[484,[],"MetadataBoundary"]
8:["$","div",null,{"children":[["$","p",null,{"className":"eyebrow rule-label","children":"Food & issue taxonomy"}],["$","h1",null,{"className":"font-editorial mt-6 max-w-4xl text-4xl leading-[1.08] text-[var(--maroon-dark)] sm:text-5xl lg:text-6xl","children":"Browse a normalized hierarchy of oil-event evidence"}],["$","p",null,{"className":"mt-6 max-w-3xl text-lg leading-8 text-[var(--muted)]","children":"Broad categories organize normalized concepts, while every original Qwen label remains visible as an alias. The hierarchy covers oil products, issue types, adulterants, claim status, regulatory actions, supply-chain stages, detection methods and ontology relationships."}]]}]
9:["$","div",null,{"className":"self-end border-l-2 border-[var(--saffron)] pl-5 text-sm leading-6 text-[var(--muted)]","children":["$","p",null,{"children":"Counts describe this Qwen extraction snapshot. They are not official prevalence estimates and do not imply that every unresolved triplet is a validated ontology mapping."}]}]
10:T56d,Unsafe cooking oil, pungent smell found at KFC in Hyderabad siasat.com Hyderabad: A food safety inspection at a Hyderabad KFC outlet in Nizampet on Saturday, June 20, uncovered several food safety violations, like unsafe cooking oil, a pungent smell in the kitchen and raw chicken stored without labelling.
Officials also noted that food items lacked preparation and had improper labels; vegetarian and non-vegetarian items were stored without proper segregation; and the marination and frying sections required improved housekeeping.
Temperature monitoring records for chillers and freezers were not available.
On the positive side, food handlers were wearing hairnets, gloves and aprons, and no pest infestation was found at the establishment. Medical fitness, pest control, and water testing records were available.
An improvement notice has been issued to the establishment by Cyberabad Municipal Corporation, and staff have been asked to strengthen food storage, labelling, segregation, oil monitoring, and record maintenance practices. cooking oil unsafe_food substandard improvement notice alleged Hyderabad, Telangana, India improvement notice fflo:issuedBy Cyberabad Municipal Corporation An improvement notice has been issued to the establishment by Cyberabad Municipal Corporation raw chicken stored without labelling fflo:foundAtStep Retail raw chicken stored without labelling11:T7a9,Daltonganj police seize spurious edible oil | Ranchi News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Daltonganj: A network involved in selling spurious edible oil of a popular brand was busted and 138 boxes, containing 1,776 litres, seized from a godown near Bairya Chowk late Wednesday night, police said.
Sources also said the oil manufacturing company authorities noticed a sharp decline in sales. An internal probe indicated possible trade malpractice. Hence, they sought police assistance.
Sadar SDPO Rajesh Yadav said, âActing on a written complaint filed by the companyâs legal agency, a case was registered with the Daltonganj town police against the wholesale dealer under provisions of the Trade Act, the Copyright Act and the BNS.â
âSamples would be sent to the state food and drug testing laboratory in Ranchi for analysis. We are also investigating the retail outlets,â he added.
Food safety personnel said a simple household check, called the âfreeze testâ is helpful to understand the quality of the oil. If the oil solidifies in a refrigerator, it may indicate contamination or adulteration. Edible Oils counterfeit substandard case registration seizure suspected Daltonganj, Jharkhand, India spurious edible oil fflo:belongsToCategory Edible Oils spurious edible oil spurious edible oil sale prov:wasAssociatedWith wholesale dealer case was registered with the Daltonganj town police against the wholesale dealer seizure of spurious edible oil fflo:foundAtStep godown near Bairya Chowk seized from a godown near Bairya Chowk freeze test fflo:producesIndicator solidification in refrigerator If the oil solidifies in a refrigerator, it may indicate contamination freeze test fflo:producesIndicator solidifies in a refrigerator If the oil solidifies in a refrigerator, it may indicate contamination or adulteration case registration against wholesale dealer fflo:issuedBy Daltonganj town police case was registered with the Daltonganj town police12:Tc5a,FDA Crackdown On Adulterated & Banned Food In Vasai-Virar: 18 Shops Sealed, ₹14 Lakh Worth Goods Confiscated freepressjournal.in Vasai: Following strict directives from Tukaram Mundhe, Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), a massive crackdown has been launched against adulterated and banned food products within the jurisdiction of the Vasai-Virar Municipal Corporation.
FDA crackdown intensifies
Over the last 18 days, the FDA has intensified its operations, leading to significant seizures and the sealing of several establishments. A total of 18 shops have been sealed, and adulterated goods valued at approximately Rs. 14 lakh have been confiscated.
Massive edible oil seizure
In one operation, FDA teams raided three different establishments in the Jumhapalika jurisdiction. A staggering 4,798 kilograms of edible oil, worth Rs. 9,14,698, was seized. The oil was found stored in old and reused tins that are hazardous to human health. Furthermore, officials suspect the oil does not meet government safety standards, and samples have been sent for lab analysis. This major operation took place as part of the campaign that began on May 27, in response to Mundhe's call to take direct action against those playing with citizens' health.
Ice cream raids intensified
The FDA is also keeping a close watch on ice cream factories and shops, as consumption rises during the summer months. During recent raids officials seized 986 liters of ice cream valued at Rs. 1,97,200. Authorities suspect this ice cream was not produced in adherence to standard quality norms.
Banned gutkha action
Under the ongoing 'Raid on Banned Food Substances' campaign, the administration is targeting not only adulterated food but also banned products like gutkha and pan masala. 18 shops selling banned gutkha have been sealed. In connection with these cases, authorities have seized goods worth Rs. 2,10,571 and arrested 19 individuals.
Official statement
Venktesh Chavan, Assistant Commissioner, Food and Drug Administration Palghar, emphasized the administration's resolve, stating, “The campaign against food adulteration has been intensified. Special teams have been deployed to conduct raids across various locations. Strict action will be taken if any food adulteration or sale of banned products is found within the Vasai-Virar municipal area. This campaign will continue in the future.”
To get details on exclusive and budget-friendly property deals in Mumbai & surrounding regions, do visit: https://budgetproperties.in/ edible oil substandard contamination seizure sealing suspected Vasai-Virar, Palghar, Maharashtra, India edible oil fflo:belongsToCategory Oils 4,798 kilograms of edible oil FDA Crackdown in Vasai-Virar fflo:targets edible oil crackdown has been launched against adulterated and banned food products edible oil fflo:hasAdulterant hazardous storage contaminants stored in old and reused tins that are hazardous to human health sealing of 18 shops fflo:issuedBy Food and Drug Administration 18 shops selling banned gutkha have been sealed arrest of 19 individuals fflo:issuedBy Food and Drug Administration arrested 19 individuals13:T1787,This toxic adulterant in edible oils can damage your nervous system: Here's how to check if your cooking oil is safe indiatimes.com Most people worry about calories when they reach for their cooking oil. Very few think to worry about paralysis. But there is a chemical adulterant that has caused mass poisoning events across multiple continents, left tens of thousands of people permanently disabled, and has been found in edible oils in India. It's called tri-ortho-cresyl phosphate, or TOCP, and it has no place in food.
So what is it, how does it get into cooking oil, and what can you actually do about it at home? Here's what you need to know.
TOCP is an organophosphorus compound primarily used in industrial settings as a lubricant, plasticiser, and jet engine oil additive. 
TOCP is highly toxic and can induce neurotoxicity, reproductive toxicity, and immunotoxicity. Most critically, it causes a delayed neurodegenerative condition known as organophosphate-induced delayed neurotoxicity, which affects both the central and peripheral nerves and can result in permanent damage to the neurological system.
This isn't theoretical. The damage TOCP can do has been documented in outbreak after outbreak over more than a century. In 1930, TOCP was added to an alcoholic beverage in the United States, leaving between 20,000 and 100,000 people permanently affected. Early symptoms included numbness and tingling in the extremities, with partial permanent paralysis at higher doses.
In 1959, Morocco  experienced an epidemic of paralysis after poor Arab families unknowingly cooked with olive oil adulterated with TOCP, which had been acquired cheaply as a jet engine flushing fluid. By the end of that outbreak, over 10,000 individuals had been afflicted.
India has not been spared. Outbreaks of TOCP-induced delayed neurotoxicity have been reported in Mumbai, where 58 patients were affected, and four subsequent outbreaks were documented in Bengal. Patients presented with cramping muscle pain, numbness, progressive weakness in the limbs, and in severe cases, spasticity and loss of function in both legs and arms.
FSSAI has developed a rapid testing programme called DART, which stands for Detect Adulteration with Rapid Test, specifically designed so that consumers can check common adulterants without laboratory equipment.
For TOCP specifically, the FSSAI-recommended test involves taking 2ml of the oil sample and adding a small amount of solid yellow butter to it. If red colour forms immediately, it indicates the presence of TOCP in the oil. It's a simple, inexpensive test that takes under a minute and can be done in any kitchen.
Beyond the TOCP-specific test, there are broader checks worth doing with any cooking oil. A refrigerator test is useful: place oil in a glass in the fridge for two to three hours. Pure oils show uniform thickening, while adulterated oils often separate into cloudy layers. A visual clarity check also helps since pure oils are generally transparent and consistent in colour. Anything that looks murky, has an unusual odour, or separates unexpectedly warrants caution.
For oils sold loose or in unlabelled containers, the risk is significantly higher. India has a documented history of oil adulteration, including the 1998 Delhi mustard oil poisoning that killed 60 people and made over 3,000 ill. Buying oil in sealed, branded, FSSAI-licensed packaging with a clearly marked batch number and manufacturing date isn't a guarantee, but it substantially reduces the risk. mustard oil adulteration contamination alleged Delhi, India TOCP fflo:commonIn Morocco Morocco experienced an epidemic of paralysis after poor Arab families unknowingly cooked with olive oil adulterated with TOCP TOCP fflo:commonIn Mumbai Outbreaks of TOCP-induced delayed neurotoxicity have been reported in Mumbai TOCP fflo:causesEffect delayed neurotoxicity TOCP-induced delayed neurotoxicity 1998 Delhi poisoning incident fflo:inRegion Delhi 1998 Delhi mustard oil poisoning tri-ortho-cresyl phosphate fflo:causesEffect organophosphate-induced delayed neurotoxicity it causes a delayed neurodegenerative condition known as organophosphate-induced delayed neurotoxicity tri-ortho-cresyl phosphate fflo:causesEffect neurotoxicity TOCP is highly toxic and can induce neurotoxicity tri-ortho-cresyl phosphate fflo:causesEffect reproductive toxicity TOCP is highly toxic and can induce neurotoxicity, reproductive toxicity, and immunotoxicity. tri-ortho-cresyl phosphate fflo:causesEffect immunotoxicity TOCP is highly toxic and can induce neurotoxicity, reproductive toxicity, and immunotoxicity edible oils fflo:hasAdulterant tri-ortho-cresyl phosphate has been found in edible oils in India tri-ortho-cresyl phosphate fflo:commonIn India found in edible oils in India tri-ortho-cresyl phosphate fflo:commonIn United States TOCP was added to an alcoholic beverage in the United States tri-ortho-cresyl phosphate fflo:causesEffect organophosphate-induced delayed neurotoxicity TOCP is highly toxic and can induce neurotoxicity tri-ortho-cresyl phosphate fflo:causesEffect permanent paralysis partial permanent paralysis at higher doses TOCP fflo:commonIn Bengal four subsequent outbreaks were documented in Bengal TOCP fflo:causesEffect cramping muscle pain Patients presented with cramping muscle pain TOCP fflo:causesEffect spasticity in severe cases, spasticity and loss of function TOCP fflo:detectedBy DART For TOCP specifically, the FSSAI-recommended test involves taking 2ml of the oil sample refrigerator test fflo:producesIndicator separation into cloudy layers adulterated oils often separate into cloudy layers refrigerator test fflo:producesIndicator uniform thickening Pure oils show uniform thickening visual clarity check fflo:producesIndicator murky appearance Anything that looks murky, has an unusual odour, or separates unexpectedly warrants caution 1998 Delhi mustard oil poisoning fflo:associatedWith illness 1998 Delhi mustard oil poisoning that killed 60 people and made over 3,000 ill14:Td89,Maharashtra FDA Cracks Down On Gutkha And Unsafe Food; 33 Arrested, Goods Worth Over ₹8.56 Crore Seized freepressjournal.in Mumbai, June 9: The Maharashtra Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has continued its statewide crackdown against banned gutkha, pan masala and unsafe food products, resulting in the arrest of 33 persons, sealing of 19 establishments and seizure of goods worth over Rs 31 lakh between June 6 and June 8, 2026.
The action was carried out under the directions of FDA Commissioner Tukaram Mundhe as part of the department’s ongoing drive against prohibited tobacco products and food adulteration.
Statewide raids and arrests
According to officials, raids were conducted across Mumbai, Konkan, Pune, Nashik, Chhatrapati Sambhajinagar, Amravati and Nagpur divisions targeting gutkha and pan masala sellers as well as establishments violating food safety norms.
The Konkan division recorded the highest number of actions with raids on 10 establishments and arrest of nine persons. In Mumbai, officials conducted raids at six locations and arrested six accused.
Pune division saw action at five places with five arrests, while three persons were arrested in Chhatrapati Sambhajinagar.
In Amravati, seven establishments were raided and seven persons arrested, while Nagpur division recorded four arrests following action against four establishments.
Officials said FIRs were registered under sections of BNS along with relevant provisions of the Food Safety and Standards Act. Goods worth Rs 31.46 lakh were seized during the operation.
Campaign against adulterated and unsafe food
Apart from the anti-gutkha drive, the FDA also launched a large-scale campaign against adulterated and unsafe food products under its “Safe Food, Safe Drug, Safe Maharashtra” initiative.
Between June 1 and June 8, food safety officers inspected 120 establishments across the state and seized nearly 8.10 lakh kilograms of suspected substandard food items and adulterants worth around Rs 8.25 crore.
The seized products included khoya, jaggery, edible oil, energy drinks and other food materials suspected to be unsafe or misleadingly packaged.
Officials said food samples collected during the raids have been sent to laboratories for analysis.
Also Watch:
Public advisory
The FDA has appealed to citizens to report cases of food adulteration or sale of suspicious food products through the FoSCOS portal, Food Safety Connect App or the toll-free helpline 1800-222-365.
“Playing with public health will not be tolerated. Citizens have a right to safe and pure food. Strict action will continue against those involved in adulteration or sale of banned substances,” Commissioner Tukaram Mundhe said.
To get details on exclusive and budget-friendly property deals in Mumbai & surrounding regions, do visit: https://budgetproperties.in/ edible oil substandard unsafe_food seizure suspected Maharashtra, India statewide crackdown against banned gutkha fflo:issuedBy Maharashtra Food and Drug Administration Maharashtra Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has continued its statewide crackdown against banned gutkha statewide crackdown against banned gutkha fflo:targets gutkha crackdown against banned gutkha statewide crackdown against banned gutkha fflo:targets pan masala crackdown against banned gutkha, pan masala statewide crackdown against banned gutkha fflo:targets unsafe food products crackdown against banned gutkha, pan masala and unsafe food products15:Ta95,Articles worth over Rs 15.8 lakh seized by FDA in week long raids indiatimes.com Nashik: The Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) has launched a crackdown on food business operators across Nashik district to ensure consumers receive safe, unadulterated and quality food products.
As part of the drive conducted between May 28 and June 4, FDA officials carried out inspections at multiple establishments and seized food articles and prohibited products collectively worth over Rs 15 lakh.
Senior FDA officials said the department is continuously gathering confidential information about establishments allegedly selling substandard food items and taking action against violators.
Acting on a tip-off that ice cream and frozen desserts were being manufactured under unhygienic conditions at Madasangvi, FDA officials raided the unit and seized stock worth Rs 8,000.
On the same day, the department inspected a chikki manufacturing unit in Niphad and confiscated peanut chikki stock valued at Rs 15,200. In another action, soybean oil being sold loose at a shop in Chandwad was seized for violating food safety norms.
FDA officials said similar inspections and enforcement operations were conducted in Igatpuri, Sinnar, Khode Nagar and Panchavati in Nashik city, as well as Deola, Peth, Malegaon and Girnare.
During the seven-day drive, officials collected samples of khoya (mawa), farsan, caffeinated beverages, milk and loose edible oil for laboratory analysis. Large quantities of state-banned food products, including gutka and scented tobacco, were also seized from individuals and transporters in Igatpuri, Deola, Panchavati and Mumbai Naka.
“The department is continuously gathering confidential information regarding the sale of substandard and adulterated food products. Strict action is being taken against violators to safeguard public health,” an FDA official said.
The drive is being conducted under the directives of Maharashtra FDA Commissioner Tukaram Mundhe and the guidance of Joint Commissioner (Food) Shrikant Karkale.
Officials have appealed to citizens to immediately report instances of food adulteration or related violations through the FDA’s toll-free helpline, 1800-222-365. soybean oil substandard unsafe_food seizure suspected Chandwad, Nashik, Maharashtra, India ice cream fflo:hasAdulterationMethod manufacturing under unhygienic conditions ice cream and frozen desserts were being manufactured under unhygienic conditions frozen desserts fflo:hasAdulterationMethod manufacturing under unhygienic conditions ice cream and frozen desserts were being manufactured under unhygienic conditions soybean oil fflo:foundAtStep Retail soybean oil being sold loose at a shop in Chandwad16:Tfb9,Nashik: FDA Seizes Suspected And Illegal Food Stock Worth ₹15.89 Lakh In Week-Long Crackdown freepressjournal.in Nashik: The Food and Drug Administration (FDA), Nashik Division, has launched a special campaign to ensure that citizens have access to pure, authentic, and nutritious food products. Under this campaign, during the seven-day period from May 28 to June 3, 2026, the division seized a stock of suspicious and illegal food products valued at ₹15,89,533.
This operation was carried out under the directives of FDA Commissioner Tukaram Mundhe and under the guidance of Joint Commissioner (Food) Shrikant Karkale. Teams comprising Food Safety Officers Amit Raskar, Sanket Yelmam, Govinda Gaikwad, Vaibhav Gade, S.D. Mahajan, Rutuja Navale, Akshay Khedkar, Sandeep Torne, Pratik Bhad, Sonal Padale, Chetan Pardeshi, Suhas Mandlik, Akshay Gadekar, and Umesh Suryavanshi conducted raids at various locations.
Key Raids and Seizures
- May 29: At 'Krishna Ice Cream' in Madsangvi, it was discovered that ice cream was being manufactured under unhygienic conditions. Samples of the 'Frozen Dessert' were collected, and a stock worth ₹8,000 was seized.
- May 29: At 'Maharashtra Chikki' in Kundewadi (Niphad Taluka), production was found to be underway without a valid license. 71.250 kg of 'Peanut Chikki' (valued at ₹15,200) was seized.
- May 29: In Chandwad, refined soybean oil was found being sold in loose form. 148.4 kg of oil (valued at ₹22,260) was seized.
- May 29: In Igatpuri, a stock of food products banned by the Government of Maharashtra was found kept for sale; consequently, stock worth ₹5,620 was seized. A case regarding this incident has been registered at the Igatpuri Police Station. - May 30: At Binnar Dairy in Sinnar, 'Khoya' (solidified milk solids) was found being sold under unhygienic conditions. 26 kg of Khoya (valued at ₹7,480) was seized.
- June 3: In Peth (Peth Taluka), stocks of 'Sting' and 'Monster' energy drinks, valued at ₹20,880, were seized.
- June 3: In Panchavati, a vehicle transporting banned food products was seized (valued at ₹4,26,584).
- June 3: On Peth Road, Panchavati, another vehicle transporting banned food products was seized (valued at ₹3,75,640).
- June 3: In Malegaon, milk samples were collected, and a stock of 58 litres of milk was destroyed.
Appeal by the Administration
D. G. Tamboli, Joint Commissioner (Food) of the Food and Drug Administration, stated: “A constant vigil is being maintained over those involved in food adulteration and illegal business practices. Various teams are active across the district. We appeal to the citizens that, should they encounter any adulterated or suspicious food products, they should immediately contact our toll-free number: 1800222365.”
This campaign has created a perception that food safety standards are being significantly strengthened within the Nashik district. soybean oil substandard unsafe_food seizure suspected Chandwad, Nashik, Maharashtra, India FDA Seizes Suspected And Illegal Food Stock fflo:targets Peanut Chikki 71.250 kg of 'Peanut Chikki' (valued at ₹15,200) was seized manufacturing ice cream under unhygienic conditions prov:wasAssociatedWith Krishna Ice Cream ice cream was being manufactured under unhygienic conditions Seizure of banned food products in Panchavati fflo:foundAtStep Distribution vehicle transporting banned food products was seized seizure of refined soybean oil fflo:issuedBy Food and Drug Administration 148.4 kg of oil (valued at ₹22,260) was seized. seizure of banned food products fflo:issuedBy Food and Drug Administration stock of food products banned by the Government of Maharashtra was found kept for sale; consequently, stock worth ₹5,620 was seized destruction of 58 litres of milk fflo:issuedBy Food and Drug Administration milk samples were collected, and a stock of 58 litres of milk was destroyed seizure of refined soybean oil in Chandwad fflo:inRegion Nashik In Chandwad, refined soybean oil was found being sold in loose form.17:T98d,Nashik FDA confiscates food items worth over Rs 1 lakh on suspicion of adulteration indiatimes.com Nashik: Food articles worth over ₹1 lakh were seized in a series of raids carried out by the Nashik Food and Drug Administration (FDA) across multiple locations on May 27, targeting suspected adulterated and unlicensed food businesses.
The crackdown began in the Nashik Road area, where officials, acting on specific information, raided a shop found operating without a valid licence. During the inspection, the team seized and sealed 1,584 bottles of two brands of caffeinated beverages and energy drinks, valued at over Rs 31,000, on suspicion of adulteration.
On the same day, the FDA conducted multiple raids across the district. At a snack shop in Panchavati, food items worth over Rs 13,000 were sealed, while in a separate action, soyabean oil stock valued at Rs 68,000 was seized. In Trimbakeshwar, paneer worth Rs 3,200 was sealed, and further raids in Igatpuri and Sinnar led to the seizure of sweetened carbonated drinks worth over Rs 2,400.
Senior FDA officers said the drive is part of a broader effort to clamp down on adulterated and substandard food products. They added that, acting on instructions from top officials, the department has begun gathering intelligence on businesses involved in such activities.
The seized food items remain in the custody of the respective traders, while samples have been sent for laboratory analysis. Joint commissioner Shrikant Karkale, who holds charge of the Nashik FDA, warned that strict action will follow if violations are confirmed.
“If the samples are found to be substandard or adulterated, strict legal action will be taken against the traders under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006,” he said, adding that the crackdown will continue in the future. soyabean oil substandard adulteration seizure suspected Nashik, Maharashtra, India laboratory analysis fso:isPerformedOn samples samples have been sent for laboratory analysis seizure of caffeinated beverages fflo:targets caffeinated beverages seized and sealed 1,584 bottles of two brands of caffeinated beverages seizure of soyabean oil fflo:targets soyabean oil soyabean oil stock valued at Rs 68,000 was seized paneer fflo:foundAt Trimbakeshwar In Trimbakeshwar, paneer worth Rs 3,200 was sealed Nashik FDA prov:wasAssociatedWith Shrikant Karkale Joint commissioner Shrikant Karkale, who holds charge of the Nashik FDA18:T9c1,Food safety raids at Hyderabad bakery, brewery uncover expired food, pest infestation, hygiene violations thehindu.com Food safety inspections conducted by the Telangana Food Safety department at a bakery and a brewery in Hyderabad’s Nagole area on Wednesday (May 20) uncovered serious hygiene and food safety violations, with officials finding pest infestation, expired food products and suspected reuse of cooking oil at two establishments.
According to a press note issued by the department, inspections at Urban Monk Fine Dine and Baking in LB Nagar and Meld Haus brewery in Nagole revealed multiple violations. Officials found expired and mislabelled food products, improper food storage practices, poor sanitary conditions and suspected repeated use of cooking oil at the premises.
In a separate inspection in Karimnagar, officials detected serious violations at Ganesh Bangalore Bakery in Subhash Nagar. Food Safety officers found 750 damaged eggs that were foul-smelling and infested with houseflies. Authorities also discarded 20 kg of cakes suspected to have been prepared using the spoiled eggs.
“Expired and spoiled food articles, along with suspected reused cooking oil, were discarded on the spot during the inspections. Enforcement samples were collected from the establishments and sent for laboratory analysis,” the department said.
They further added that necessary action is being initiated against the Food Business Operators concerned under the provisions of the Food Safety and Standards Act.
Published - May 21, 2026 12:10 am IST cooking oil adulteration reused cooking oil necessary action suspected Hyderabad, Telangana, India laboratory analysis fso:isPerformedOn enforcement samples Enforcement samples were collected from the establishments and sent for laboratory analysis Food Business Operators fflo:compliesWith Food Safety and Standards Act action is being initiated against the Food Business Operators concerned under the provisions of the Food Safety and Standards Act Ganesh Bangalore Bakery prov:wasAssociatedWith use of spoiled eggs prepared using the spoiled eggs cooking oil fflo:hasAdulterant reused cooking oil suspected reuse of cooking oil cakes fflo:hasAdulterant spoiled eggs prepared using the spoiled eggs necessary action fflo:issuedBy Telangana Food Safety department necessary action is being initiated against the Food Business Operators finding expired food products fflo:foundAtStep Retail finding pest infestation, expired food products19:T64c,4,000 litres of suspected adulterated oil seized | Kanpur News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Kanpur: Police seized around 4,000 litres of suspected adulterated edible oil during a raid near Mantora Bridge in industrial area of Kanpur Dehat on Friday.
According to police, the raid was carried out after authorities received information that adulterated oil was being illegally stored on a vacant plot located between Premnagar and Mantora Bridge. The operation was led by surveillance in-charge Praveen Yadav, SOG in-charge JP Sharma and Raniya police station head Dinesh Gautam along with police personnel.
The team recovered 20 drums containing nearly 4,000 litres of loil from the site. Officials suspect that the oil may have been stored for illegal adulteration and distribution purposes.
Following the recovery, officials from the food and logistics department were called to the spot. Samples of the suspected oil were collected and sent to a laboratory for testing to determine its quality and composition.
Police said the seized oil has been taken into custody and further legal action will be initiated after the laboratory examination report is received.
ASP Alok Prasad said a district-wide campaign against adulteration and illegal food-related activities is currently underway and strict action would be taken against those found involved in such offences. edible oil adulteration substandard seizure custody suspected Kanpur, Kanpur Dehat, Uttar Pradesh, India suspected oil sample fflo:collectedAt vacant plot between Premnagar and Mantora Bridge Samples of the suspected oil were collected1a:Tb40,Hyderabad: Food safety inspection flags unsafe oil at KFC outlet in Kondapur siasat.com Hyderabad: A food safety inspection has flagged violations related to cooking oil quality at a KFC outlet in Kondapur.
According to food safety authorities, a team conducted a random inspection at the outlet located in Rajarajeshwari Colony. During the inspection, the Total Polar Compounds (TPC) levels in the cooking oil were found to be above the permissible limits.
Officials also observed dark discolouration in the oil, indicating repeated use beyond prescribed safety standards. Action is being initiated against the outlet under relevant provisions of food safety regulations.
TPC levels are used to assess the degradation of cooking oil, and exceeding the prescribed limit is considered unsafe for consumption. Officials said such violations can pose health risks if not addressed.
Food raids in Hyderabad
Hyderabad has witnessed a series of food safety inspections in recent months, with authorities intensifying checks across restaurants, cloud kitchens and food outlets. Several establishments in Hyderabad, including well-known chains like the KFC, have been flagged for violations such as reuse of cooking oil, poor hygiene and improper storage practices.
In recent inspections across the city, officials have identified issues ranging from expired food items to lack of proper monitoring of oil quality. Notices and penalties have been issued in multiple cases.
The enforcement drives are being carried out under the guidelines of the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) to ensure compliance with safety norms.
Authorities have advised food business operators to strictly adhere to prescribed standards, particularly regarding oil reuse and hygiene, while consumers have been urged to report concerns related to food quality. cooking oil unsafe_food substandard Action is being initiated against the outlet suspected Hyderabad, Telangana, India safety norms lkif:created_by Food Safety and Standards Authority of India guidelines of the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) to ensure compliance with safety norms TPC violation finding prov:wasAttributedTo KFC outlet in Kondapur flagged violations related to cooking oil quality at a KFC outlet TPC violation finding fflo:foundIn cooking oil Total Polar Compounds (TPC) levels in the cooking oil were found TPC levels found above permissible limits fflo:constitutes TPC limit violation Total Polar Compounds (TPC) levels in the cooking oil were found to be above the permissible limits TPC limit violation fflo:violates TPC permissible limit above the permissible limits SensoryTest fflo:producesIndicator dark discolouration Officials also observed dark discolouration in the oil TPC violation finding fflo:triggeredAction Action against KFC outlet Action is being initiated against the outlet1b:Tbba,Food safety administration flags substandard food products nagalandpost.com Food Safety Administration, Dimapur Zone (Dimapur, Niuland, Chumoukedima, Mon and Peren) has issued a public notice identifying several food products as substandard following routine surveillance and laboratory testing conducted under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006.
In a press release, designated officer, Pelerieno Kehie, stated that under the Act, a food item is classified as “substandard” when it fails to meet prescribed quality standards, but not so as to render the article of food unsafe.
The administration urged consumers to distinguish between substandard (low-quality) and unsafe (harmful or toxic) food.
While substandard items may not cause immediate illness, designated officer said they still violate regulatory norms and undermine consumer trust.
According to the notice, four products failed to meet mandatory quality benchmarks:
1) Mast Health Multi-source Edible Oil (370g), batch BMMS-69; manufactured November 9, 2025; expiry July 8, 2026
2) Top Paneer Sterilised by JK Dairy (450g), batch 300PA25; manufactured October 27, 2025; expiry July 26, 2026
3) William’s Vinegar (350 ml), batch 105; packaged November 2025; best before 24 months
4) Shreeji Refined Soyabean Oil (375g), batch OPG30; manufactured September 30, 2025; expiry June 29, 2026
The Food Safety Administration informed that legal proceedings have been initiated against the sellers involved.
Under the Act, any person found manufacturing, storing, selling or importing substandard food is liable for a penalty of up to Rs 5 lakh.
It further noted that “unsafe” food—posing a direct risk to public health—attracts much stricter penalties, including heavy fines and imprisonment.
Consumers have been advised to check their pantries for the listed batch numbers. Retailers have been directed to immediately remove the specified lots from their shelves.
For further information or to report concerns, consumers may contact the Food Safety Helpline at 03862-366349 during office hours or reach the chief medical officer’s office (food safety section). Mast Health Multi-source Edible Oil substandard public notice legal proceedings suspected Dimapur, Nagaland, India Mast Health Multi-source Edible Oil fflo:belongsToCategory Edible Oils Mast Health Multi-source Edible Oil Top Paneer fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy Top Paneer Sterilised by JK Dairy public notice identifying several food products as substandard fflo:issuedBy Food Safety Administration, Dimapur Zone issued a public notice identifying several food products as substandard legal proceedings against sellers fflo:issuedBy Food Safety Administration legal proceedings have been initiated against the sellers involved unsafe food fflo:triggersPenalty heavy fines and imprisonment attracts much stricter penalties, including heavy fines and imprisonment Food Safety Helpline fflo:contactNumber 03862-366349 contact the Food Safety Helpline at 03862-3663491c:Te58,Cyberabad food adulteration raids Hyderabad Rs 64 lakh seizure 28 arrested indiatoday.in Food adulteration racket busted in Hyderabad; oil, namkeen worth lakhs seized
Sources revealed that the police had major success in seizing 5,026 litres of oil and 5,192 kilograms of wheat during the operation, which targeted a wide range of items, including bakery products, sweets, salty snacks, edible oils, wheat flour, ginger-garlic paste, meat products, ice creams, and sauces.
In a major crackdown on food adulteration and illegal manufacturing, the Cyberabad Enforcement Wing carried out extensive search operations from January 1 to April 21 in Hyderabad, seizing adulterated food items, machinery, and vehicles worth Rs 64.07 lakh, and arresting 28 individuals associated with the units, sources close to the development told India Today.
Sources further revealed that the police had a major success in seizing 5,026 litres of oil and 5,192 kilograms of wheat during the operation, which targeted a wide range of items, including bakery products, sweets, salty snacks, edible oils, wheat flour, ginger-garlic paste, meat products, ice creams, and sauces.
Several units that came under the scanner allegedly used expired ingredients, synthetic food colours, and hazardous chemicals. Many establishments were found operating in highly unhygienic conditions without valid FSSAI certification or trade licences.
Overall, the police registered 22 cases and busted manufacturing units that were preparing ginger-garlic paste using harmful preservatives and fake branding.
Following the raids, the police urged citizens to purchase food products only from licensed vendors, to check expiry dates, and to report any suspicious activity to authorities.
In a separate incident, police also arrested 10 people associated with a tea-powder adulteration racket and seized a large quantity of products.
"Authorities found 10 tea godowns containing adulterated stock. Around 3000 kg of adulterated tea powder, 1500 kg of expired tea powder, and synthetic colour and jaggery items were seized. Hyderabad, known for its tea culture, is facing a racket where adulterated tea is supplied to roadside vendors, stalls, and centres across the city. The culprits mixed synthetic dyes into cheap or expired tea powder sourced from West Bengal and Assam, then sold it at lower prices," senior police officer Gaikwad Vaibhav Ragunath told news agency ANI. edible oil adulteration seizure suspected Hyderabad, Telangana, India Hyderabad food adulteration crackdown fflo:inRegion Hyderabad Food adulteration racket busted in Hyderabad ginger-garlic paste fflo:hasAdulterant harmful preservatives preparing ginger-garlic paste using harmful preservatives tea powder fflo:hasAdulterant synthetic dyes mixed synthetic dyes into cheap or expired tea powder expired tea powder fflo:hasAdulterant synthetic dyes mixed synthetic dyes into cheap or expired tea powder Hyderabad food adulteration crackdown fflo:issuedBy Cyberabad Enforcement Wing Cyberabad Enforcement Wing carried out extensive search operations bakery products fflo:hasAdulterant expired ingredients units that came under the scanner allegedly used expired ingredients salty snacks fflo:hasAdulterant expired ingredients units that came under the scanner allegedly used expired ingredients adulterated tea powder fflo:foundAtStep Retail adulterated tea is supplied to roadside vendors, stalls, and centres Tea powder adulteration racket fflo:inRegion Hyderabad Hyderabad, known for its tea culture, is facing a racket tea powder fflo:hasAdulterationMethod mixing synthetic dyes culprits mixed synthetic dyes into cheap or expired tea powder1d:T718,Cyberabad Cops Book 28, Seize Adulterated Food Worth Rs 64 Lakh deccanchronicle.com Cyberabad Police said strict action will continue against offenders to ensure food safety and protect public health.
Hyderabad: Cyberabad Enforcement Wing along with the Special Operations Team (SOT) booked 28 persons for running food adulteration and illegal manufacturing units, seizing adulterated food material, raw stock and property worth Rs 64.07 lakh.
The seizures included bakery products, sweets, 120 kg of namkeen, 230 kg of meat, 3,809 kg of ginger‑garlic paste, 150 kg of loose sauces, ice cream stock and three tonnes of used cooking oil. Police said 22 offences were detected since January 1 during raids across the commissionerate.
Investigators found several units preparing and selling adulterated food items that posed risks to public health. Raids targeted bakeries, sweet shops, namkeen units, edible oils, wheat flour, ginger‑garlic paste, meat products, ice creams and sauces. Many were operating without valid FSSAI or trade licences, using expired ingredients, synthetic colours and unsafe chemicals in unhygienic conditions.
In one case, police seized 5,026 litres of adulterated edible oil and 5,192 kg of wheat flour. Illegal units manufacturing ginger‑garlic paste with harmful preservatives and fake branding were also unearthed.
Police urged citizens to purchase food only from licensed vendors, check expiry dates and report suspicious activity to the police and food safety department.
Cyberabad Police said strict action will continue against offenders to ensure food safety and protect public health. edible oil adulteration booking of persons seizure of goods suspected Cyberabad, Telangana, India Adulteration Act in Cyberabad prov:used sweets The seizures included bakery products, sweets1e:Ta85,22 cases booked in Cyberabad food adulteration crackdown, ₹64 lakh worth goods seized thehindu.com A total of 28 individuals were arrested, and 22 cases were booked by the Cyberabad Enforcement Wing during a series of raids conducted between January 1 and April 21, 2026, targeting food adulteration and illegal food manufacturing across the commissionerate. Adulterated food items, along with machinery and vehicles, valued at approximately ₹64.07 lakh were seized during the raids.
The operation focused on a wide range of food categories, including bakery and cake products, sweets and namkeen, edible oils, wheat flour, ginger-garlic paste, meat products, ice creams, sauces and the illegal reuse of cooking oil. Investigations revealed widespread violations, with several units using expired ingredients, synthetic food colours and unsafe chemicals, while operating in unhygienic conditions without valid Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) or trade licences.
A major case involved large-scale adulteration of edible oil and wheat flour, leading to the seizure of 5,026 litres of oil and 5,192 kilograms of flour. Authorities also uncovered illegal units manufacturing ginger-garlic paste using harmful preservatives and counterfeit branding.
According to item-wise data, nine cases were registered in the bakery and cake products category with seizures worth ₹2,72,980. Three cases related to sweets and namkeen led to the seizure of 120 kilograms of products valued at ₹62,000. One case each was booked in edible oil and wheat flour, with seizures worth ₹10,55,460 and ₹3,11,520 respectively.
Two cases involving ginger-garlic paste resulted in the seizure of 3,809 kilograms valued at ₹9,57,280, while two cases in meat and chicken products saw 230 kilograms seized worth ₹63,290. In the ice-cream category, two cases were registered with stock worth ₹8,00,000 seized. One case involving sauces and processed food led to the seizure of 150 kilograms of loose sauce valued at ₹39,900. Officials also seized three tonnes of used cooking oil seized worth ₹11 lakh.
Meanwhile, the police urged people to purchase food items only from licensed vendors, check expiry dates and report suspicious activities to authorities. Officials said strict enforcement will continue to curb food adulteration and safeguard public health.
Published - April 22, 2026 07:32 pm IST edible oil adulteration case_booked seizure alleged Cyberabad, Telangana, India ginger-garlic paste fflo:hasAdulterant harmful preservatives manufacturing ginger-garlic paste using harmful preservatives edible oil fflo:belongsToCategory Edible Oils One case each was booked in edible oil1f:T78e,Food Adulteration: Barnala admin imposes Rs 2L fine indiatimes.com Bathinda: The Barnala district administration has imposed a fine amounting to Rs 2.25 lakh in seven cases of selling substandard food products. The fines were imposed under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. These included substandard samples of milk cake from a Barnala-based firm; khoya from Dhanaula; mustard oil from Ghunas; cooking oil from Handiaya; another sample of mustard oil from a firm in Ghunas; mustard oil from Tapa; and paneer from a firm in Dhanaula village.
Barnala DC Harpreet Singh stated that the health department has been directed to carry out regular inspections and sampling to effectively curb adulteration in food and dairy products, including milk, paneer and edible oils. 
He stated that all collected samples are sent to the laboratory for testing and cases pertaining to substandard samples are adjudicated in the court of the additional deputy commissioner. ADC Vivek Kumar Modi stated that during the period from January to March 2026, the health department collected 29 samples of various food items. Of these, 18 samples met the prescribed quality standards, while 11 were found to be substandard. The present fines were imposed in the new fiscal starting April 1. 
MSID: 130189903 413 | mustard oil cooking oil substandard Rs 2.25 lakh fine suspected Barnala, Punjab, India Rs 2.25 lakh fine fflo:issuedBy Barnala district administration Barnala district administration has imposed a fine amounting to Rs 2.25 lakh testing fso:isPerformedAt laboratory all collected samples are sent to the laboratory for testing Rs 2.25 lakh fine fflo:targets milk cake substandard samples of milk cake from a Barnala-based firm Rs 2.25 lakh fine fflo:targets mustard oil mustard oil from Ghunas Rs 2.25 lakh fine fflo:targets cooking oil cooking oil from Handiaya Rs 2.25 lakh fine fflo:targets paneer paneer from a firm in Dhanaula village20:T60d,Expired Mustard Oil Seized in Hazaribag Food Safety Raid | Ranchi News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Hazaribag: Acting on directives of DC Shashi Prakash Singh and additional chief medical officer Dr Shashi Jaiswal, a food safety team conducted a surprise raid at a Barhi-based business firm on Tuesday, uncovering a large stock of expired mustard oil.
Led by food safety officer Md Manjar Hussain, the team collected samples of multiple brands for chemical analysis at the state food testing laboratory in Namkum.
During inspection, officials seized 813 tins and 144 bottles of expired mustard oil. The stock was immediately confiscated and sealed on the spot. Officials also found that the trader was operating without a valid food licence. Jaiswal confirmed the seizure and said legal action would be initiated under provisions of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. mustard oil substandard prohibited_additive seizure legal action suspected Hazaribag, Jharkhand, India expired mustard oil fflo:belongsToCategory Oils expired mustard oil chemical analysis fso:isPerformedAt state food testing laboratory in Namkum chemical analysis at the state food testing laboratory in Namkum chemical analysis fso:isPerformedOn samples of multiple brands collected samples of multiple brands for chemical analysis Seizure of expired mustard oil fflo:foundAtStep Retail uncovering a large stock of expired mustard oil legal action fflo:targets expired mustard oil legal action would be initiated under provisions of the Food Safety and Standards Act21:Tb24,Over 5,000 litres of adulterated cooking oil seized in Gachibowli; expired wheat flour repackaged for sale thehindu.com Thousands of litres of adulterated cooking oil and wheat flour were seized during raids carried out by the Madhapur Special Operations Team (SOT) at two locations in Hyderabad on Monday (March 9, 2026).
The accused were identified as 46-year-old Bhanwar Ram, and his 22-year-old son Ashok Kumar, both natives of Rajasthan. According to the police, the father–son duo had been operating an adulteration racket from different premises in NTR Nagar and Vattinagulapally in Gachibowli.
During the raids which followed a tip-off, officials seized more than 5,000 litres of adulterated cooking oil, over 5,000 kilograms of wheat flour, a weighing machine, packaging material and other equipment. The total value of the seized material is estimated to be around ₹21 lakh.
Preliminary investigation revealed that the accused allegedly collected expired cooking oil of different brands and mixed it with soybean oil. The mixture was then repackaged and sold in the market under different brand names.
Police also found that expired wheat flour sourced from multiple companies was repackaged and relabelled as “Jasnath Gold Chakki Atta” before distribution for sale.
An official from the Gachibowli police said that Food Safety inspectors are expected to collect samples of the seized products and send them for laboratory testing. Based on the results, the accused will be formally booked and further investigation will be taken up.
Published - March 10, 2026 12:14 pm IST cooking oil soybean oil adulteration substitution expired cooking oil seizure raid suspected Hyderabad, Gachibowli, Telangana, India expired cooking oil fflo:isSubstituteFor soybean oil collected expired cooking oil of different brands and mixed it with soybean oil expired wheat flour fflo:isSubstituteFor wheat flour expired wheat flour sourced from multiple companies was repackaged and relabelled as “Jasnath Gold Chakki Atta” cooking oil fflo:belongsToCategory Oils adulterated cooking oil Adulteration of cooking oil and wheat flour in Gachibowli prov:wasAssociatedWith Ashok Kumar father–son duo had been operating an adulteration racket Adulteration of cooking oil and wheat flour in Gachibowli prov:used cooking oil collected expired cooking oil of different brands and mixed it with soybean oil Adulteration of cooking oil and wheat flour in Gachibowli prov:used wheat flour expired wheat flour sourced from multiple companies was repackaged Mixing expired cooking oil with soybean oil fflo:hasFraudType Substitution collected expired cooking oil of different brands and mixed it with soybean oil Adulteration of cooking oil and wheat flour in Gachibowli prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhanwar Ram The accused were identified as 46-year-old Bhanwar Ram22:T94f,Adulterated cooking oil, wheat flour worth Rs 21 lakh seized in Hyderabad siasat.com Hyderabad: The Madhapur Special Operations Team conducted raids at two locations in Hyderabad on Monday, March 9. During the raid, thousands of litres of adulterated cooking oil and wheat flour were seized.
In the case, the accused were identified as Bhanwar Ram, 46, and his 22-year-old son Ashok Kumar. They are natives of Rajasthan.
They were allegedly running an adulteration racket from premises located in NTR Nagar and Vattinagulapally in the Gachibowli area.
Large quantity of adulterated products seized
Acting on a tip-off, officials carried out raids and seized more than 5,000 litres of adulterated cooking oil and over 5,000 kilograms of wheat flour.
Police also recovered a weighing machine, packaging materials, and other equipment used in the operation. The seized items are estimated to be worth around Rs 21 lakh.
Expired oil, wheat flour repackaged for sale
As per the investigation, the accused allegedly mixed expired cooking oil of various brands with soybean oil. They then repackaged the oil to sell it in the market under different brand labels.
During the raids, police also discovered expired wheat flour which was repacked and relabelled to sell in the market.
The seized products may be tested in a laboratory, and based on the results, police will register formal cases against the accused and continue further investigation. cooking oil adulteration substandard mislabeling expired cooking oil raid seizure alleged Hyderabad, Gachibowli, Telangana, India cooking oil fflo:hasAdulterant expired cooking oil mixed expired cooking oil of various brands with soybean oil cooking oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod mixing expired oil with soybean oil mixed expired cooking oil of various brands with soybean oil Adulteration of cooking oil and wheat flour in Hyderabad prov:wasAssociatedWith Ashok Kumar accused were identified as Bhanwar Ram, 46, and his 22-year-old son Ashok Kumar Adulteration of cooking oil and wheat flour in Hyderabad prov:used cooking oil accused allegedly mixed expired cooking oil Adulteration of cooking oil and wheat flour in Hyderabad prov:used wheat flour expired wheat flour which was repacked and relabelled Repackaging expired oil and flour fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling repackaged the oil to sell it in the market under different brand labels23:T927,FSDA seizes adulterated food worth  ₹12.34 crore in UP hindustantimes.com FSDA seizes adulterated food worth ₹12.34 crore in UP
VP Singh, FSDA assistant commissioner, said strict action is being taken against those involved in misbranding, adulteration and sale of substandard food products. “We have either seized or destroyed adulterated items and oil worth ₹12.34 crore since February 20,” Singh said, adding that surveillance and sampling drives will continue in the coming days.
With Holi around the corner, the Food Safety and Drug Administration (FSDA), Uttar Pradesh, has seized adulterated food items and edible oil worth ₹12.34 crore in the last 10 days, as part of a statewide enforcement drive against food adulteration, officials said on Monday.
VP Singh, FSDA assistant commissioner, said strict action is being taken against those involved in misbranding, adulteration and sale of substandard food products. “We have either seized or destroyed adulterated items and oil worth ₹12.34 crore since February 20,” Singh said, adding that surveillance and sampling drives will continue in the coming days.
The department has stepped up inspections across the state, including Lucknow, ahead of peak seasonal demand for sweets and snacks. Residents have been urged to check packaging details, manufacturing and expiry dates, and quality certifications before making purchases.
To encourage public participation, FSDA Lucknow has released helpline numbers and digital platforms for lodging food quality complaints. Complaints can be registered at FSDA headquarters (18001805533), the Lucknow district office (+91 522 3514492), via WhatsApp (9793429747, 8756128434), the chief minister’s helpline (1076), or online at consumerhelpline.gov.in.
Officials said prompt reporting by consumers can help authorities act quickly and prevent unsafe food products from reaching the market. edible oil adulteration Seizure of adulterated food and oil alleged Uttar Pradesh, India Seizure of adulterated food and oil fflo:targets edible oil seized adulterated food items and edible oil Seizure of adulterated food and oil fflo:targets food items seized adulterated food items and edible oil Seizure of adulterated food and oil fflo:issuedBy FSDA Uttar Pradesh FSDA, Uttar Pradesh, has seized adulterated food items and edible oil24:Tc85,Kanpur Adulterated Food: Pre-Holi raids in Kanpur: FSDA seizes 9 quintals of adulterated mawa & edible oil worth Rs 29L | Kanpur News - The Times of India indiatimes.com KANPUR: In a crackdown on food adulteration ahead of Holi, the Food Security and Drug Administration (FSDA) department on Wednesday seized adulterated mawa and edible oil worth Rs 29.08 lakh and destroyed a large quantity of unsafe products.
Acting on a tip-off, a special FSDA team raided Panki Railway Station, where around 9 quintals of mawa was allegedly brought into the city via an EtawahâKanpur passenger train. On spotting the officials, labourers unloading the consignment fled the scene. The mawa, wrapped in dirty cloth and found in a highly unhygienic condition, was declared unfit for human consumption. As no one claimed ownership, the seized mawa, valued at Rs 3.42 lakh, was transported to a rubbish disposal plant and destroyed.
According to food safety officer Sanjay Pratap Singh, the action was taken in compliance with the directions of Cans the district magistrate. The special team included Rajnish Kumar Rai, Ajay Kumar Maurya, Somnath Kushwaha, Anil Kumar, Sanjay Kumar Verma and Sarika Singh.
While enroute to the disposal site, the team intercepted an e-rickshaw carrying mawa. The carrier claimed ownership, following which two samples were collected for testing, and the remaining consignment was released after a preliminary examination.
In a separate operation on Tuesday evening, another FSDA team raided a trader's shop at Sachendi and found a large stock of Amrit, Maya and Safari brand soybean oil allegedly imported from Nepal. On-the-spot testing by the Food Safety on Wheels laboratory indicated adulteration. The team seized around 15,894 litres of edible oil worth Rs 25.66 lakh.
The food safety officer said the department intensified inspections across the district to curb adulteration in edible items during the festive season and is running a special campaign to deter adulterators. edible oil adulteration unspecified adulterant seizure suspected Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India seizure of adulterated mawa and edible oil fflo:issuedBy Food Security and Drug Administration FSDA department on Wednesday seized adulterated mawa and edible oil mawa fflo:hasAdulterant unspecified adulterant seized adulterated mawa edible oil fflo:hasAdulterant unspecified adulterant seized adulterated mawa and edible oil mawa fflo:foundAt Panki Railway Station raided Panki Railway Station, where around 9 quintals of mawa was allegedly brought mawa fflo:hasAdulterationMethod unhygienic storage wrapped in dirty cloth and found in a highly unhygienic condition mawa sample fflo:collectedAt Distribution While enroute to the disposal site, the team intercepted an e-rickshaw carrying mawa soybean oil adulteration finding fflo:foundAtStep Retail raided a trader's shop adulteration in soybean oil fflo:producedBy On-the-spot testing On-the-spot testing by the Food Safety on Wheels laboratory indicated adulteration seizure of soybean oil fflo:issuedBy FSDA The team seized around 15,894 litres of edible oil seizure of soybean oil fflo:targets soybean oil The team seized around 15,894 litres of edible oil25:T637,Holi Crackdown: 30,000 Oil Packs Seized, Tonnes Of Fake Paneer Destroyed Across Uttar Pradesh businesstoday.in Ahead of Holi, authorities in Uttar Pradesh have intensified a statewide crackdown on adulterated food items to ensure festive food safety. Food Safety teams conducted raids across multiple districts, targeting fake paneer, mawa and suspicious edible oil. In Ghaziabad, nearly 2,500 kg of paneer and 200 kg of mawa were destroyed in just 72 hours. In Kanpur Dehat, officials seized around 30,000 containers of edible oil from four factories, while raids in Gautam Buddha Nagar and Saharanpur uncovered large quantities of suspected spurious paneer. Samples have been sent for testing, with authorities warning of strict action against adulterators as Holi approaches. edible oil adulteration substandard seizure suspected Kanpur Dehat, Uttar Pradesh, India Destruction of 2,500 kg paneer and 200 kg mawa fflo:inRegion Ghaziabad In Ghaziabad, nearly 2,500 kg of paneer and 200 kg of mawa were destroyed Seizure of 30,000 edible oil containers in Kanpur Dehat fflo:inRegion Kanpur Dehat In Kanpur Dehat, officials seized around 30,000 containers of edible oil suspected spurious paneer finding fflo:inRegion Gautam Buddha Nagar raids in Gautam Buddha Nagar and Saharanpur uncovered large quantities of suspected spurious paneer uncovered large quantities of suspected spurious paneer fflo:inRegion Saharanpur raids in Gautam Buddha Nagar and Saharanpur uncovered large quantities of suspected spurious paneer fso:Analysis fso:isPerformedOn Samples Samples have been sent for testing26:Tbc8,Food safety teams seize adulterated khoya in Agra, edible oil in Mânagar | Agra News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Agra: As part of an ongoing crackdown on food adulteration, authorities seized and destroyed 1,320 kg of adulterated khoya in Agra and confiscated nearly 12,000 litres of adulterated edible oil in Muzaffarnagar over the past two days, officials said on Saturday.
In Agra, the district administration intercepted a pickup van carrying adulterated khoya from Rajasthan around 8 am on Shamshabad Road. A Food Safety and Drug Administration (FSDA) team seized 22 containers of khoya, each weighing 60 kg and valued at about Rs 2.37 lakh. On-the-spot testing by an FSDA mobile laboratory found the stock unfit for human consumption, following which the entire consignment was destroyed at the Bamrauli Katara dumping zone.
 Two statutory samples were sent for laboratory analysis. 
Driver Narayan Singh from Rajasthan's Dholpur district said the consignment belonged to state-based dairy trader Rajan Singh. Legal action under the Food Safety and Standards Act is underway. 
Meanwhile, in Muzaffarnagar, a food safety team raided a cooking oil unit operating as Kavya Trading on the Shamli Bypass and seized around 12,000 litres of adulterated edible oil worth about Rs 15 lakh. The premises were sealed, and eight samples of mustard oil, rice bran oil and colouring material were collected for testing. Officials said further action would depend on laboratory reports, with criminal proceedings likely if the oil is found toxic. 
Additional district magistrate Sanjay Singh said a joint enforcement team carried out the raid as part of ongoing action against food adulteration. edible oil mustard oil rice bran oil adulteration colouring material seizure premises sealed criminal proceedings likely suspected Muzaffarnagar, Uttar Pradesh, India Khoya Seizure Agra prov:wasAttributedTo Rajan Singh consignment belonged to state-based dairy trader Rajan Singh IncidentFinding: Khoya Seizure Agra fflo:foundIn khoya seized and destroyed 1,320 kg of adulterated khoya IncidentFinding: Khoya Seizure Agra fflo:foundAtStep Distribution intercepted a pickup van carrying adulterated khoya IncidentFinding: Khoya Seizure Agra fflo:inRegion Agra seized and destroyed 1,320 kg of adulterated khoya in Agra IncidentFinding: Khoya Seizure Agra fflo:triggeredAction Legal action under Food Safety and Standards Act Legal action under the Food Safety and Standards Act is underway IncidentFinding: Oil Seizure Muzaffarnagar fflo:foundIn edible oil confiscated nearly 12,000 litres of adulterated edible oil IncidentFinding: Oil Seizure Muzaffarnagar fflo:foundAtStep Processing raided a cooking oil unit operating as Kavya Trading IncidentFinding: Oil Seizure Muzaffarnagar fflo:inRegion Muzaffarnagar confiscated nearly 12,000 litres of adulterated edible oil in Muzaffarnagar IncidentFinding: Oil Seizure Muzaffarnagar prov:wasAttributedTo Kavya Trading raided a cooking oil unit operating as Kavya Trading27:T11a6,Sale of adulterated coconut oil: farmers elated over SHRC’s intervention thehindu.com Farmers in the upland areas of Kozhikode district have welcomed the intervention of the State Human Rights Commission (SHRC) following complaints regarding the alleged large-scale manufacture and sale of adulterated coconut oil in various parts of the State. They said the move reflected the mounting anxiety among consumers, particularly, in rural areas, over escalating prices and declining product quality.
Acting on a petition over the sale of impure coconut oil in north Kerala districts, the Commission directed the Food Safety Commissioner to conduct an urgent inquiry and file a report within 15 days. The matter would be considered at the Commission’s next sitting at the PWD Rest House in Kozhikode.
“We were expecting strong action against the unfair trade practice. There should also be flash inspections at units producing adulterated coconut oil,” said A.K. Vijayan, a coconut farmer from Kuttiyadi. He added that a ban on a few illegal brands alone would have a lasting impact.
In the order, SHRC judicial member K. Byjunath observed that complaints about the sale of adulterated oil at prices significantly lower than that of genuine coconut oil warranted immediate scrutiny by an expert team. Drawing the Commission’s attention, the petitioners contended that certain distributors in Kozhikode city, Wayanad district, and Vadakara village were supplying substandard oil at rates far below the prevailing market price of nearly ₹400 a kg for pure coconut oil, raising serious public health concerns.
The complainants further alleged the involvement of supply chains with links beyond Kerala in pushing the suspected products into local markets. Small-scale mill owners and farmers also voiced concern over the price disparity, warning that such practices could undermine traditional coconut-based livelihood and destabilise the agrarian economy.
Though the Food Safety department had recently intensified inspections and seized adulterated consignments in its enforcement drives, the protesting farmers said the Commission’s directive would add urgency and accountability to maintain the process and step up vigil. They also pointed out that the department squads’ action five years ago had led to the ban of over 40 illegal oil brands in the State.
“The main buyers of the polluted edible oil are a few hoteliers who cash in on the sale of cheap products. There are also wayside eateries and junk food outlets that depend on the steady supply of adulterated oil,” said V. Philip, a farmer from Kutityadi. He added that there were even hoteliers who increased the price of food items citing the high price of coconut oil, hiding the fact that they were using adulterated oil.
Published - February 19, 2026 07:00 pm IST coconut oil adulteration substandard adulterated coconut oil urgent inquiry directive suspected Kozhikode, Kerala, India coconut oil fflo:hasAdulterant adulterated coconut oil sale of adulterated coconut oil in various parts of the State adulterated oil fflo:foundAt wayside eateries wayside eateries and junk food outlets that depend on the steady supply of adulterated oil adulterated oil fflo:foundAt junk food outlets junk food outlets that depend on the steady supply of adulterated oil urgent inquiry directive fflo:issuedBy State Human Rights Commission Commission directed the Food Safety Commissioner to conduct an urgent inquiry urgent inquiry directive fflo:issuedBy State Human Rights Commission Commission directed the Food Safety Commissioner to conduct an urgent inquiry coconut oil fflo:hasAdulterant adulterated coconut oil petition over the sale of impure coconut oil in north Kerala districts adulterated oil fflo:foundAt Retail wayside eateries and junk food outlets that depend on the steady supply of adulterated oil adulterated oil fflo:foundAt hoteliers The main buyers of the polluted edible oil are a few hoteliers Using adulterated oil while citing high coconut oil prices fflo:hasFraudType Masking hoteliers who increased the price of food items citing the high price of coconut oil, hiding the fact that they were using adulterated oil using adulterated oil while claiming high coconut oil prices fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling hiding the fact that they were using adulterated oil seizure of adulterated consignments fflo:issuedBy Food Safety department Food Safety department had recently intensified inspections and seized adulterated consignments28:Tc9d,McDonald’s Outlet In Jaipur Under Scanner After Food Safety Violations Found During Surprise Check; 40 Litres Of Oil & 40 Kgs Rotten Tomatoes Destroyed freepressjournal.in Jaipur: In a surprise inspection conducted on Monday, food safety officials from the Rajasthan health department uncovered serious hygiene and food safety lapses at a McDonald’s outlet located in Gaurav Tower, Jaipur. The inspection revealed that the cooking oil used for frying food had crossed safe consumption limits, raising health concerns.
Unsafe oil quality detected
During the inspection, officers tested the refined palm oil used to prepare items like French fries and other fried foods. The results showed that the Total Polar Compounds (TPC)- a key indicator of oil degradation- exceeded the permissible limit of 25%. The oil used for vegetarian food registered a TPC level of 31%, while oil used for non-vegetarian items recorded 28%, both above safe standards.
Health experts warn that oil with high TPC levels becomes toxic, increasing the formation of harmful substances, including carcinogenic compounds and trans fats. “Excessive TPC makes cooking oil dangerous for consumption and significantly raises the risk of heart disease,” Dr Manish Mittal, Chief Medical Health Officer (Jaipur-II) told TOI.
Oil found overused and unhygienic
Officials found the oil to be extremely dark, indicating prolonged reuse. Despite its poor condition, food was being fried continuously throughout the day at temperatures around 150°C. As a precautionary step, nearly 40 litres of oil were destroyed on-site, and samples were collected for laboratory testing.
The restaurant manager, present during the inspection, was instructed to immediately replace the oil and ensure compliance with food safety standards. Authorities confirmed that a formal improvement notice will be issued under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006, and further action will follow based on test reports.
Rotten vegetables discovered in cold storage
Apart from oil quality issues, inspectors also detected unhygienic storage practices. Around 40 kilograms of spoiled tomatoes were found stored in plastic crates inside the cold room. The rotten stock was disposed of immediately to prevent contamination. palm oil unsafe_food substandard Total Polar Compounds destruction of oil formal improvement notice suspected Jaipur, Rajasthan, India McDonald's outlet in Gaurav Tower, Jaipur prov:wasAttributedTo High TPC in cooking oil cooking oil used for frying food had crossed safe consumption limits refined palm oil fflo:hasAdulterant Total Polar Compounds cooking oil used for frying food had crossed safe consumption limits Total Polar Compounds fflo:causesEffect heart disease significantly raises the risk of heart disease Total Polar Compounds fflo:causesEffect carcinogenic compounds formation increasing the formation of harmful substances, including carcinogenic compounds refined palm oil fflo:hasPermissibleLimit TPC Limit 25% exceeded the permissible limit of 25% TPC Limit 25% fflo:appliesTo Total Polar Compounds permissible limit of 25% Spoiled tomatoes finding fflo:foundAtStep Storage spoiled tomatoes were found stored in plastic crates inside the cold room29:T131a,The Vitamin D trap: How âfortifiedâ oil poisoned Punjab homes indiatimes.com Chandigarh: A medical investigation spanning the states of Punjab and Kolkata finally uncovered the source of a toxic "fortified" oil that left several residents of Punjab in critical condition.
Months after TOI reported cases in PGI where several patients with severe Vitamin D toxicity were admitted, health officials in Rajpura, Patiala, traced the fraudulent supply chain back to Kolkata.
The alarm was first raised when six residents of Rajpura, including two children, were rushed to PGI's emergency wing. The patients presented with alarming symptoms, including persistent vomiting, extreme weakness, and an altered sensorium—a state of clouded consciousness. Diagnostic tests at the institute revealed life-threatening levels of Vitamin D, a condition known as Hypervitaminosis D, which led to severe hypercalcemia (excess calcium in the blood) and acute kidney distress.
Subsequent investigation by the Punjab health department and food safety wing exposed a sophisticated web of local-level adulteration and branding fraud. According to officials, the perpetrators utilised raw oil from reputed brands but tampered with the product before it reached consumers.
In a deceptive "mixing" operation concentrated in Fatehgarh Sahib and Rajpura, distributors allegedly opened original packages and infused the oil with excessive, toxic concentrations of Vitamin D. 
"This adulterated mixture was then refilled in loose bottles and sold under a local brand name. To gain public trust, the bottles carried fraudulent labels claiming the oil was ‘Fortified for bone health' and falsely bore the FSSAI approval mark," said Dr Gurpreet Kaur, district health officer, Patiala.
The DHO confirmed that the food safety wing moved to file a formal court case against the perpetrators. The crackdown followed results from the state food lab in Kharar, which officially declared the seized samples as substandard and hazardous. In earlier raids, officials had already confiscated over 350 boxes and hundreds of bottles of the suspect oil.
"We have initiated public announcements across villages near Rajpura, advising residents to immediately cease the consumption of this oil," Dr Kaur said. 
Dr Divjot Singh, district epidemiologist, confirmed that while a survey was conducted in villages, the retail shopkeeper involved has since closed his shop. 
Patients in distress, officials on toes
Six Rajpura residents, including two children, landed in PGI with severe Vitamin D toxicity
Patients showed persistent vomiting, extreme weakness and altered sensorium; tests revealed life-threatening hypercalcemia and acute kidney distress
Punjab health and food safety teams traced the source to adulterated "fortified" oil tampered at local mixing units
Raw oil from reputed brands was allegedly opened, infused with excessive Vitamin D, and repackaged under a fake local brand
Bottles carried fraudulent labels, including false FSSAI approval marks, to win consumer trust
State food lab in Kharar declared seized samples substandard and hazardous
Over 350 boxes and hundreds of bottles had been seized in earlier raids
Food safety wing has initiated court proceedings against the accused
Public advisories issued across Rajpura-area villages to stop usage of the oil immediately
Retail shopkeeper involved has shut his shop following investigations
MSID:: 126143805 413 | edible oil adulteration substandard mislabeling Vitamin D court proceedings public advisories raids lab_confirmed Rajpura, Patiala, Punjab, India oil fflo:hasAdulterant Vitamin D infused the oil with excessive, toxic concentrations of Vitamin D Vitamin D fflo:causesEffect Hypervitaminosis D life-threatening levels of Vitamin D, a condition known as Hypervitaminosis D severe Vitamin D toxicity fflo:affectsPopulation children Six Rajpura residents, including two children, landed in PGI with severe Vitamin D toxicity court proceedings fflo:issuedBy Food safety wing Food safety wing has initiated court proceedings Hypervitaminosis D fflo:causesEffect hypercalcemia led to severe hypercalcemia Hypervitaminosis D fflo:causesEffect acute kidney distress and acute kidney distress Vitamin D fflo:commonIn Punjab poisoned Punjab homes Hypervitaminosis D fflo:hasEffectType fflo:AcuteEffect severe Vitamin D toxicity Vitamin D fflo:causesEffect acute kidney distress acute kidney distress Vitamin D fflo:causesEffect persistent vomiting persistent vomiting Vitamin D fflo:causesEffect extreme weakness extreme weakness fortified oil fflo:hasAdulterant Vitamin D infused with excessive Vitamin D oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod mixing operation tampered at local mixing units mixing operation fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling Bottles carried fraudulent labels IncidentFinding: oil substandard fflo:foundIn oil declared seized samples substandard2a:T8de,Inspection throws up health scare in form of expired foods, fake oil | Jaipur News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Jaipur: Health department food safety officers Tuesday found expired food products stored on racks during an inspection at Amazon Seller Services Pvt Ltd in Jhotwara Industrial Area. The expired items included coriander powder, masala buttermilk, pumpkin seeds and a 1kg packet of chickpeas, all past their expiry dates.
Officials also found dust accumulation on multiple packets and several leaking packs, terming the storage conditions unsafe for consumers. 
Samples of almond beverage, Unibic biscuits and cinnamon were collected for laboratory testing under the Food Safety and Standards Act, while all expired products were destroyed on the spot. Officials said legal action will follow after test reports are received.
The team also detected misleading labelling, with âKrista' brand bandhani hing being sold in place of genuine hing. A separate challan will be filed before the court for this violation, officials said. 
In a separate action, food safety officers investigated a complaint of fake Sona Sikka brand groundnut oil allegedly being sold in Jaipur. The complaint, filed by a representative of Shyam and Shyam Oil Pvt Ltd, led the team to Messrs Girraj Trading Company and Messrs Girraj Prasad Pradeep Kumar in Tunga. 
Shop owners told officials they had ordered Sona Sikka oil but found the supplied tins suspicious and promptly alerted the company, preventing the sale of potentially substandard oil. 
During inspection, 15 tins were found at one shop and 24 at another. Food safety officers seized all 39 tins and collected samples for testing at the Central State Food Laboratory. Further action will be taken based on the laboratory report. groundnut oil counterfeit substandard seizure sample collection suspected Jaipur, Rajasthan, India Unibic biscuits sample fflo:collectedAt Amazon Seller Services Pvt Ltd Samples of almond beverage, Unibic biscuits and cinnamon were collected Krista brand bandhani hing fflo:isSubstituteFor hing Krista brand bandhani hing being sold in place of genuine hing Analysis of Sona Sikka groundnut oil fso:isPerformedAt Central State Food Laboratory testing at the Central State Food Laboratory2b:Tc2a,Adulterated paneer and cooking oil seized ahead of Diwali | Agra News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Agra:Ahead of Diwali, officials have stepped up efforts to curb food adulteration. The Food Safety and Drug Administration (FSDA) carried out swift operations across districts to ensure that residents receive safe and pure festive delicacies. In the Mansoorpur area of Muzaffarnagar, the FSDA team intercepted a vehicle on the highway carrying around 15 quintals of adulterated paneer worth nearly Rs 3.3 lakh; the product, allegedly headed to Uttarakhand for sale, was seized and later destroyed by burying it in the ground using a JCB. Officials also collected four samples for laboratory testing.
Food inspector Archana Deheeran told TOI, "Paneer was being brought from Aligarh to supply Uttar Pradesh; samples have been collected, and the entire paneer that was in bad condition was also destroyed. Apart from this, we also destroyed 'khiya' (reduced dry milk). The drive is ongoing due to upcoming festivals." Mahendra Singh, the assistant commissioner of FSDA Agra, said, "During the inspection, around five shops were issued improvement notices for hygiene violations."
Chief food safety officer Atul Pathak said, "Information was received that a large quantity of oil was being illegally transported. Acting on the information, a team arrived at the scene. 
The warehouse owner is currently absconding. The warehouse has been closed, and a notice is being posted. Once the owner arrives, oil samples will be sent for testing. If found guilty, strict action will be taken."
FSDA Agra conducted inspections across several locations in the district, collecting 11 food samples and destroying over 2.2 tonnes of substandard food items. During the enforcement drive, officials seized and destroyed 1,725 kg of khoya, 500 kg of paneer and 30 kg of artificially coloured petha worth around Rs 4.48 lakh, which were being stored or transported under unhygienic conditions.
In addition, 800 kg of edible oil â including 600 kg of mustard oil and 200 kg of refined soybean oil â worth about Rs 1.3 lakh was seized from local shops. Samples were also collected from well-known establishments, and two samples of sugar toys were taken for testing. The FSDA has sent all 11 samples for laboratory analysis, and further legal action will follow under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. edible oil mustard oil refined soybean oil substandard unsafe_food seizure closure notice suspected Agra, Uttar Pradesh, India paneer fflo:hasAdulterant unknown adulterant in paneer carrying around 15 quintals of adulterated paneer adulterated paneer fflo:foundAt Distribution intercepted a vehicle on the highway carrying around 15 quintals of adulterated paneer khiya fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy destroyed 'khiya' (reduced dry milk) improvement notices for hygiene violations fflo:issuedBy FSDA around five shops were issued improvement notices for hygiene violations seizure of edible oil fflo:foundAtStep Retail seized from local shops petha fflo:hasAdulterant artificial colour 30 kg of artificially coloured petha2c:T790,Flies hovering on them, 145kg rasgullas destroyed by food safety officials in Noida indiatimes.com Noida: Food safety officials destroyed over 430kg of contaminated sweets and seized over 365kg of adulterated oil in the past two days during the inspections. 
On Saturday, a team raided a manufacturing unit in Devla, Greater Noida, where large quantities of sweets had been prepared and stored in unhygienic conditions. "The Rasgullas were kept uncovered, exposed to flies and mosquitoes, and stored in dirty containers. About 145 kg of Rasgullas were disposed of on the spot. Officials also found around 80kg of a white powder that the unit operators claimed was arrowroot, a starch used as a thickening agent. The powder was seized for testing," said assistant commissioner (food) GB Nagar, Sarvesh Mishra.
The same day, the team seized around 285kg of mustard oil from a general store in Barola, Sector 49, after it appeared adulterated and the shopkeeper failed to produce purchase bills. Additional samples of mustard oil, gram flour laddus and multi-source edible oil were also collected from other shops in Noida.
Earlier, Friday's raids in Ghodi Bachhera village of Greater Noida led to the destruction of another 285kg of Rasgullas and seizure of 35kg of white powder claimed to be Arrowroot prepared in similarly unhygienic conditions.
Mishra said, "We are carrying out continuous inspections across the district to prevent adulteration and ensure that only clean and safe food items reach the public ahead of Diwali. Strict action will be taken wherever violations are found." mustard oil adulteration seizure suspected Noida, Gautam Buddha Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, India Mustard Oil fflo:hasAdulterant Adulterant seized around 285kg of mustard oil ... after it appeared adulterated Arrowroot seizure fflo:foundAtStep Processing seizure of 35kg of white powder claimed to be Arrowroot prepared in similarly unhygienic conditions2d:T8b1,Adulterated edible oil worth Rs53L seized in Kanpur raid | Kanpur News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Kanpur: The Food Safety and Drug Administration (FSDA) carried out a major raid on Friday at M/s Gayatri Oil Industry in Fazalganj, seizing approximately 35,727 litres of edible oil worth Rs53 lakh after the Food Safety on Wheels (FSW) test found the samples suspicious.
Officials discovered that the oil containers had fresh stickers pasted over old ones. The entire stock stored in the godown was seized for further investigation. 
Assistant Commissioner (Food-II) Sanjay Pratap Singh said another FSDA team led by a food safety officer raided Satyam Sweet House in Maharajpur and destroyed 75 kilograms of substandard cheese worth Rs22,500. In a separate operation, officials raided Reouna village in Ghatampur tehsil and destroyed 240 kilograms of mawa made from substandard materials. Around 10kg vegetable fat worth Rs2,704 were also seized from the site. 
Singh said the department has launched a special campaign against adulteration and the sale of substandard food items to ensure the availability of pure and safe food for citizens. The drive is being conducted under the directions of the Food Commissioner. Various FSDA teams collected 25 food samples, including refined rice bran oil, mustard oil, mixed milk, cheese, mawa, and skimmed milk powder from different parts of the city.The department also deployed a mobile testing lab (FSW) and DOM machine to conduct on-the-spot food testing.
Food vendors were instructed to maintain hygiene, use standard ingredients, and clearly display the shelf life and "best before" dates on milk products to ensure transparency and consumer safety. edible oil adulteration substandard suspicious samples raid seizure suspected Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India mawa fflo:hasAdulterant substandard materials mawa made from substandard materials on-the-spot food testing fflo:requiresKit DOM machine deployed a mobile testing lab (FSW) and DOM machine to conduct on-the-spot food testing FSW test finding fflo:foundAtStep Storage FSW test found the samples suspicious Food Safety on Wheels test fflo:producesIndicator suspicious samples FSW test found the samples suspicious2e:Tb40,FSDA seizes substandard supply of edible oil worth 30L | Kanpur News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Kanpur: The Food Safety and Drug Administration Department (FSDA) on Thursday seized a large consignment of edible oil of substandard quality and other food items during a citywide inspection drive.
According to officials, a total of 19,944 litres of edible oil worth Rs 30,22,468 was seized from Guru Nanak Oil Traders after the Food Safety on Wheels (FSW) mobile testing unit declared the oil sample as suspicious.
In a parallel operation, food safety officers confiscated approximately 1,500 kg of substandard cardamom seeds and âgatta' from three business establishments where the food products were being manufactured in unhygienic conditions. Another team seized 1,350 kg of adulterated pulses valued at Rs 54,000 being prepared in similar conditions.
Assistant Commissioner (Food-II) Sanjay Pratap Singh said the department has launched a special campaign against the sale of substandard and adulterated food items to ensure citizens receive pure and healthy food. The drive is being conducted under the directions of the food commissioner. 
Officers further instructed vendors to maintain hygiene and use only unadulterated, standard ingredients in food preparation. TNN edible oil substandard seizure suspected Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India Suspicious edible oil finding at Guru Nanak Oil Traders prov:wasAttributedTo Guru Nanak Oil Traders seized from Guru Nanak Oil Traders after the Food Safety on Wheels (FSW) mobile testing unit declared the oil sample as suspicious IncidentFinding: Suspicious edible oil at Guru Nanak Oil Traders fflo:foundIn edible oil a total of 19,944 litres of edible oil worth Rs 30,22,468 was seized from Guru Nanak Oil Traders after the Food Safety on Wheels (FSW) mobile testing unit declared the oil sample as suspicious IncidentFinding: Substandard cardamom seeds fflo:foundIn cardamom seeds confiscated approximately 1,500 kg of substandard cardamom seeds IncidentFinding: Suspicious edible oil at Guru Nanak Oil Traders fflo:producedBy Food Safety on Wheels (FSW) mobile testing unit Food Safety on Wheels (FSW) mobile testing unit declared the oil sample as suspicious IncidentFinding: Substandard cardamom seeds fflo:foundAtStep Processing where the food products were being manufactured IncidentFinding: Adulterated pulses fflo:foundIn pulses seized 1,350 kg of adulterated pulses IncidentFinding: Adulterated pulses fflo:foundAtStep Processing being prepared in similar conditions Seizure of substandard edible oil fflo:issuedBy Food Safety and Drug Administration Department The Food Safety and Drug Administration Department (FSDA) on Thursday seized a large consignment of edible oil RegulatoryAction: Seizure of substandard edible oil fflo:targets edible oil seized a large consignment of edible oil of substandard quality2f:Tb98,Pre-Diwali crackdown on food adulteration in Lucknow hindustantimes.com Pre-Diwali crackdown on food adulteration in Lucknow
Suspicious food products worth ₹6.65 lakh seized, 1,552 kg items valued at ₹2.51 lakh destroyed by Food Safety and Drug Administration
LUCKNOW Ahead of Diwali and Bhai Dooj, the Food Safety and Drug Administration (FSDA) launched a major campaign to curb sale of adulterated and substandard food products, including sweets, snacks, dairy items, edible oils and other festive consumables across multiple establishments.
The department collected 31 samples from various shops, production units and storage facilities. The crackdown resulted in the seizure of 12,894 kg of suspicious food products worth approximately ₹6.65 lakh and the destruction of 1,552 kg of items valued at around ₹2.51 lakh, said VP Singh, deputy commissioner, FSDA.
Around 200 kg of toy sweets worth ₹12,000 were seized near Khurram Nagar, besides 180 kg of sweets, 450 kg of Revri, 300 kg of cardamom seeds and 720 kg of gatta, collectively worth over ₹1 lakh. Around 4 kg of adulterated talcum powder and expired packaged products were also seized.
Two consignments of dry fruits were destroyed by the FSDA at Kumar Cold Storage, Hardoi Road; these included 85 kg of dates worth ₹34,000, around 1,015 kg of dried dates (chuhara) worth ₹2.03 lakh. The department also seized 7,664 one-litre bottles of packaged drinking water worth ₹1.53 lakh from a plant in Kakori for safety violations.
Large volumes of mustard oil (over 3,200 kg) and other edible oils were seized from an outlet in Lal Kuan while around 56 litres of milk was found unsafe during roadside inspection and destroyed on the spot. Around 400 kg of substandard flour and other non-compliant food products were also destroyed, and notices were issued to the vendors concerned, said officials.
Sweets and dairy-based items like milk cake, peda, rasgulla and khoya were sampled from prominent sweet shops for lab testing. Based on the results, legal action will be taken under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. mustard oil edible oils substandard adulteration seizure suspected Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India substandard flour fflo:hasAdulterant substandard 400 kg of substandard flour Pre-Diwali crackdown on food adulteration fflo:targets sweets curb sale of adulterated and substandard food products, including sweets Pre-Diwali crackdown on food adulteration fflo:targets snacks including sweets, snacks, dairy items Pre-Diwali crackdown on food adulteration fflo:targets dairy items including sweets, snacks, dairy items Pre-Diwali crackdown on food adulteration fflo:targets edible oils including sweets, snacks, dairy items, edible oils Pre-Diwali crackdown on food adulteration fflo:targets packaged drinking water seized 7,664 one-litre bottles of packaged drinking water milk found unsafe fflo:foundAtStep Retail 56 litres of milk was found unsafe during roadside inspection30:T6ee,FDA seizes untested soyabean oil indiatimes.com Nagpur: With 
Diwali's festive fervour around the corner, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has launched a crackdown in and around Nagpur on shops selling refined soyabean oil without the mandatory laboratory setup for testing to ensure consumer safety.
In a series of raids, FDA teams stormed outlets in Chhapru Nagar and Gondia, seizing massive stocks of untested oil that flouted food safety regulations. 
The operation, led by joint commissioner, food, KR Jaipurkar targeted vendors lacking proper laboratory setups, and Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) approvals.
In Nagpur, authorities confiscated 824 litres of suspect soyabean oil, valued at 1.24 lakh, from outlets operating without mandatory testing facilities. Meanwhile, in Gondia, a staggering 2,144 litres worth 3.23 lakh were seized by the vigilance team of FDA under joint commissioner Rahul Khade and assistant commissioner Abhay Deshpande.
These raids underscore the FDA's zero-tolerance policy toward vendors bypassing quality checks, a critical measure to prevent adulterated oils from tainting festive meals. The seized oils, sold without mandatory checks and testing, posed potential health hazards, especially during Diwali when demand for cooking oil soars. soyabean oil substandard unsafe_food seizure suspected Nagpur, Maharashtra, India Gondia, Maharashtra, India soyabean oil fflo:belongsToCategory Oils refined soyabean oil seizure of untested soyabean oil fflo:targets soyabean oil seizing massive stocks of untested oil seizure of untested soyabean oil fflo:inRegion Nagpur In Nagpur, authorities confiscated 824 litres seizure of untested soyabean oil in Gondia fflo:inRegion Gondia in Gondia, a staggering 2,144 litres31:T593,Raids at 8 shops in Gurgaon, 16 food samples seized, sent for tests indiatimes.com Gurgaon: Amid ongoing Navratri celebrations, the food safety department conducted raids at eight shops, seizing 16 food samples due to safety concerns related to fasting items such as kuttu atta, singhara atta, sabudana, samak, mustard oil, jaggery and buura.
The crackdown targeted adulteration-prone goods in high demand during the festival, with samples now sent to a Karnal lab for testing. A major violation was found at Swami Agencies in Shelta Colony, operating without an FSSAI licence—prompting seizure of multiple samples. Another shop was caught selling unpackaged and unlabelled food items. Officials warned of legal action if adulteration is confirmed, citing past food poisoning incidents and urging consumers to choose sealed, branded products and report any suspicious vendors. Dr Ramesh Chauhan, a food department official, stated that the department would take strict action if any of the samples are found to be substandard or adulterated.
This inspection comes in the wake of a food safety scare earlier in March 2024, when ten people from Sector 14 fell ill after consuming fritters made with adulterated kuttu flour. mustard oil adulteration substandard raids seizure suspected Gurgaon, Haryana, India Raids at 8 shops in Gurgaon fflo:issuedBy food safety department food safety department conducted raids at eight shops32:Tca4,14 students of a government school in Hazaribag take ill after consuming snacks , hospitalized indiatimes.com Hazaribag: Fourteen students of Kasturba Gandhi Balika Uchch Vidyalaya fell ill after allegedly consuming contaminated roasted flattened rice during evening snacks on Tuesday. All of them were admitted to the Barhi subdivisional hospital after they complained of stomach-ache. Doctors at the hospital on Wednesday said the condition of the students was now stable.
The school is in Barsot village under Barhi block of the district and has over 400 students. The students alleged that they were served flattened rice with almonds. Some of them had spotted insects in their snacks.
Barhi subdivisional officer Johan Tudu visited the hospital and inquired about the quality of the food being served at the hostel while Barhi MLA Manoj Kumar Yadav spoke to Hazaribag deputy commissioner Shashi Prakash Singh and demanded action against the concerned persons. Tudu assured that a probe will be initiated into the incident.
School chairperson Malti Devi met the students at the hospital and accused hostel warden Roshni Bara of mismanagement. “Ration is often shown as unavailable and meals are irregular,” she claimed. Parents present at the hospital sought the warden removal. When contacted, Bara said the flattened rice which was served to the students were served by a vendor.
While Barsot mukhiya Motilal Choudhary alleged that school management committee meetings were not being held regularly, Ramesh Thakur, district vice-president of BJP, demanded a high-level probe into the incident.
On Wednesday, officials from the district food safety department inspected the school premises. Led by Dr Shashi Jaiswal, assistant officer and additional chief medical officer, examined the school kitchen, storeroom, and dining areas. Samples of mustard oil, rice, flour, and toasted flattened rice consumed by students were collected and sent to the state food testing laboratory in Ranchi for analysis. The team directed the warden to maintain hygiene in kitchen and dining areas, install nets on windows, and ensure the use of adulteration-free food items. In addition, cooks were directed to wear masks, caps, and aprons while preparing meals. “If any food items are found to be substandard or contaminated, action will be taken under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006,” the officials said. mustard oil contamination substandard inspection sample_collection pending_test Hazaribag, Jharkhand, India roasted flattened rice fflo:hasAdulterant insects Some of them had spotted insects in their snacks. roasted flattened rice fflo:hasIngredient almonds served flattened rice with almonds mustard oil sample fflo:collectedAt school kitchen Samples of mustard oil... were collected rice sample fflo:collectedAt school kitchen Samples of mustard oil, rice, flour, and toasted flattened rice consumed by students were collected flour sample fflo:collectedAt school kitchen Samples of mustard oil, rice, flour, and toasted flattened rice consumed by students were collected analysis of collected samples fso:isPerformedAt state food testing laboratory in Ranchi sent to the state food testing laboratory in Ranchi for analysis33:Tcb8,Onam vigil: five special squads in action to expose low-quality food products thehindu.com Strengthening its fight against adulteration and unhygienic practices, the Food Safety department has deployed five special squads with mobile lab testing facilities for aggressive checking during the Onam season in Kozhikode.
Within a week after the special drive was launched, the squads inspected 385 shops — including wayside eateries, hotels, bakeries, and restaurants — to expose erring food business units.
“We have already sent 180 samples for detailed lab inspection. As many as 48 persons were served notices,” said a senior officer. He added that nine shops had already been issued closure notices for not complying with food safety licensing norms.
Considering the high price of coconut oil and the increasing demand in view of the Onam season, the special squads have been asked to keep an eye on the purity of packaged products available in the market. Sample collection has been continuing for more than three months as part of the market vigil. Food safety department officials said they had so far collected over 170 samples for lab tests.
“The quality of three coconut oil brands has been found poor and the samples have been sent for further lab inspections at Central Food Lab. Action will be initiated soon against Tripthi coconut oil marketed by Renuka oil Mills and two other types of Bhadras Kerapriyam coconut oil,” said a Food Safety department officer who is now coordinating the inspections. He added more samples would be collected from all suspected spots.
Food Safety Assistant Commissioner A. Sakeer Hussain pointed out that the marketing of testa oil extracted from the brown outer layer of a coconut was being promoted and branded as real coconut oil, which would have to be examined closely by the buyers. He said the customers should closely checked the labels on the packages and ensure purity.
Food Safety squads also made it clear that the raw sale of unpacked coconut oil from the unregistered entrepreneurs would be taken up as an offence. Either they have to immediately stop the trade or secure permission from the police to ensure a lawful affair with accountability, they said.
Published - September 03, 2025 06:43 pm IST coconut oil adulteration substitution mislabeling testa oil Action will be initiated soon suspected Kozhikode, Kerala, India detailed lab inspection fso:isPerformedOn 180 samples sent 180 samples for detailed lab inspection coconut oil fflo:hasAdulterant testa oil marketing of testa oil extracted from the brown outer layer of a coconut was being promoted and branded as real coconut oil testa oil fflo:isSubstituteFor coconut oil testa oil extracted from the brown outer layer of a coconut was being promoted and branded as real coconut oil closure notices fflo:issuedBy Food Safety department issued closure notices for not complying with food safety licensing norms Tripthi coconut oil fflo:hasAdulterant testa oil marketing of testa oil extracted from the brown outer layer of a coconut was being promoted and branded as real coconut oil lab inspection of coconut oil samples fso:isPerformedAt Central Food Lab samples have been sent for further lab inspections at Central Food Lab34:T686,Coconut oil unit sealed in Kanniyakumari for violations thehindu.com The Kanniyakumari Food Safety Department has sealed a coconut oil manufacturing unit and a retail shop at Palugal village in Vilavancode taluk for absence of valid licence, labelling violations and suspected adulteration.
According to Food Safety Department Designated Officer Jeyarama Pandian, the inspection was initiated following a social media video from a Malayalam news channel, which reported that the unit was manufacturing oil and sending it to Kerala at different prices based on quality, raising suspicions of adulteration.
Food Safety officials inspected the manufacturing unit and a nearby retail shop on Wednesday and found that they were operating with an expired licence and failing to comply with labelling protocols. They seized a total of 507 litres of coconut oil from the unit and the shop and sealed them.
Mr. Pandian said the samples had been sent for testing and further action would be taken if adulteration was confirmed.
Published - August 21, 2025 07:32 pm IST coconut oil adulteration substandard mislabeling sealing of coconut oil unit seizure suspected Kanniyakumari, Tamil Nadu, India sealing of coconut oil unit fflo:issuedBy Kanniyakumari Food Safety Department Kanniyakumari Food Safety Department has sealed a coconut oil manufacturing unit coconut oil manufacturing unit fflo:foundAt Palugal village sealed a coconut oil manufacturing unit ... at Palugal village coconut oil manufacturing unit fflo:foundAt Vilavancode taluk at Palugal village in Vilavancode taluk coconut oil manufacturing unit fflo:foundAt Kanniyakumari Coconut oil unit sealed in Kanniyakumari35:T605,16k litres of fake coconut oil seized | Thiruvananthapuram News - Times of India indiatimes.com T'puram: The state govt seized 16,565 litres of coconut oil of suspicious quality in seven districts after the food safety department conducted surprise inspections of production and marketing centres, said health minister Veena George.
The inspections were conducted after complaints regarding the quality of coconut oil were received by the department due to rising prices. The minister stated that inspections will continue. 
The largest seizure of fake coconut oil was from Kollam district. In Kollam, 9,337 litres of coconut oil, including 5,800 litres of the Kera Surya and Kera Haritham brands, were seized, which were packed with fake FSSAI numbers and addresses for sale. In Alappuzha, 6,530 litres of fake coconut oil were seized. 
The public can report complaints about the quality of coconut oil to toll-free number 1800 425 1125. TNN coconut oil adulteration counterfeit mislabeling fake coconut oil seizure alleged Kollam, Kerala, India fake coconut oil fflo:commonIn Kollam largest seizure of fake coconut oil was from Kollam district Seizure of fake coconut oil fflo:foundAtStep Production inspections of production and marketing centres coconut oil fflo:hasAdulterant fake coconut oil seized 16,565 litres of coconut oil of suspicious quality Kera Surya fflo:hasAdulterant fake FSSAI numbers packed with fake FSSAI numbers Kera Haritham fflo:hasAdulterant fake FSSAI numbers packed with fake FSSAI numbers and addresses for sale36:Tc97,Coconut oil mills in Kangayam struggle to stem slide in production despite healthy market conditions thehindu.com On the face of it, the tidings seem favourable for the nearly 120 coconut mills in Kangayam town of Tiruppur district where oil production capacity ranges from 1,000 tonnes to 1,400 tonnes a day.
Wholesale price of milling copra rules at ₹250 to ₹260 a kg, and that of coconut oil is ₹340 to ₹400 a kg, which the manufacturers view as a healthy parity. As the output of coconut had dwindled in recent years, the demand for copra and coconut oil had witnessed a surge.
Reduction in the wholesale to the present level from the all-time high of ₹500 a kg during July notwithstanding, though the prevailing dynamics ought to be favourable for the industries, the reality is that nearly half of the mills find themselves in a spot of bother.
The margins of these member units of Kangayam Coconut oil Manufacturers Association have shrunk substantially because of the unchecked sale of adulterated product in the market, according to industry insiders.
“The State Government has to step in and rein in sale of adulterated coconut oil for cooking purpose. Companies selling adulterated products with brand names do not exist at all,” Association president N. Dhanapal said.
Mr. Dhanapal, who is also the proprietor of the NSN Group of companies, Kangayam, said the sale of coconut oil with purity had taken a hit due to the market getting flooded with adulterated product.
The adulteration is to the extent of 80 per cent. “It is difficult for the consumers to determine adulteration even if 80 per cent of refined sunflower oil or palm oil is blended with 20 per cent coconut oil,” Mr. Dhanapal said, calling for lab tests of the adulterated coconut oil to unravel the fraud.
Compared to the conditions a year back when only 10 coconut oil mills were functional due to acute shortage of inputs, the situation is far better now.
At present, there is copra availability to a considerable extent as the coconut production improved in subsequent months, but for the oil mills in Kangayam, the bane ironically persists even when the market conditions have improved. Adulterated coconut oil surface in the market in large quantities whenever the price escalates in the market, the manufacturers rue.
Published - August 07, 2025 08:35 pm IST coconut oil adulteration substitution dilution sunflower oil palm oil alleged Kangayam, Tiruppur, Tamil Nadu, India coconut oil fflo:hasAdulterant sunflower oil 80 per cent of refined sunflower oil or palm oil is blended with 20 per cent coconut oil coconut oil fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil 80 per cent of refined sunflower oil or palm oil is blended with 20 per cent coconut oil sunflower oil fflo:isSubstituteFor coconut oil 80 per cent of refined sunflower oil or palm oil is blended with 20 per cent coconut oil blending refined sunflower or palm oil with coconut oil fflo:hasFraudType Dilution 80 per cent of refined sunflower oil or palm oil is blended with 20 per cent coconut oil blending refined sunflower or palm oil with coconut oil fflo:hasFraudType Substitution 80 per cent of refined sunflower oil or palm oil is blended with 20 per cent coconut oil37:T964,Dry fruit oil traders under scanner ahead of Rakshabandhan indiatimes.com Noida: District food safety teams seized over 340 kg of food items suspected to be unsafe during inspections across Noida, Greater Noida, and Dadri, as part of a crackdown ahead of the Rakshabandhan festival on Aug 9.
The action targeted sweet shops, food processors, and traders. Items seized included refined oils and dry fruits, both widely used in the making of sweets. At Sundar Trading in Itehra village in Greater Noida West, officials seized 150 kg of refined rice bran oil suspected to be adulterated. Another team confiscated 15 kg of raisins and 178 kg of refined soybean oil from Muskan Traders, located in Noida's Kulesara village, after no batch numbers or expiry dates were found on the product packaging.
Food safety teams also destroyed 35 kg of adulterated khoya (milk solids) at Namaste Sweets in Greater Noida's Surajpur industrial area. Samples of milk and chenna from the same unit were also sent for lab testing. Inspections were also carried out at sweet shops in Noida's sectors 31, 43, 44, and 52, including outlets like Haldiram's, Om Sweets, Agarwal Sweets, and Bikaner Malaiwala. Officials collected samples of sweets, including ghevar and barfi, and used cooking oil for testing.
"With the festival approaching, the demand for sweets has shot up. Many of these seized items, like oil and dry fruits, are key ingredients in sweets preparation," said the assistant commissioner (Food) Sarvesh Mishra. "We are intensifying checks to ensure that only safe, standard-compliant food reaches consumers."
In total, 14 samples were taken and sent to the lab. Further action will follow based on the test reports. Inspections will continue across the district in the lead-up to the festival. rice bran oil soybean oil adulteration mislabeling seizure suspected Greater Noida, Gautam Buddha Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, India Noida, Gautam Buddha Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, India refined rice bran oil fflo:hasAdulterant unknown adulterant in rice bran oil seized 150 kg of refined rice bran oil suspected to be adulterated khoya fflo:hasAdulterant unknown adulterant in khoya destroyed 35 kg of adulterated khoya chenna sample fflo:collectedAt Processing Samples of milk and chenna from the same unit were also sent for lab testing Laboratory Analysis fso:isPerformedOn 14 samples 14 samples were taken and sent to the lab38:Tbc1,Court fines 2 for selling adulterated mustard oil in Ghaziabad | Noida News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Ghaziabad: The Court of Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate (ACJM) in Ghaziabad sentenced two individuals till the rise of the court and imposed a Rs 25,000 fine each for storing and selling substandard mustard oil.
The duo was convicted under sections 51 and 59 (i) of the Food Safety and Standards Act (FSSA) 2006 on Thursday. The defendants pleaded guilty and requested leniency.
The adulterated oil was being sold at the New Kirana Store located in the Municipal Market, Ghantaghar area. Acting on a tip-off, a team led by food safety officer Meera Singh purchased a sample of the oil from the shop on September 20, 2024, and sent it for laboratory testing.
The team obtained a signature and stamp on the procured sample from the proprietor of the shop, Ansar Mallick, who informed the officials that he purchased the oil from a supplier named Mahadev Enterprises.
The prosecution informed the court that the analysis report of the sample revealed that the oil was not only substandard but also unsafe for human consumption, and demanded stringent punishment for Ansari and Meena, the authorised representative of Mahadev Enterprises. The oil was manufactured by SK Oils Limited, which produced documents claiming that Mahadev Enterprises was operating under a royalty arrangement.
The court imposed a fine of Rs 20,000 each under Section 51 of the FSSA for storing and selling substandard mustard oil, and a fine of Rs 5,000 each under Section 59 (i) of the Act for endangering public health. mustard oil substandard unsafe_food fine of Rs 20,000 each under Section 51 of the FSSA fine of Rs 5,000 each under Section 59 (i) of the Act unclear Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh, India storing and selling substandard mustard oil fflo:triggeredAction fine of Rs 20,000 each under Section 51 of the FSSA The court imposed a fine of Rs 20,000 each under Section 51 of the FSSA for storing and selling substandard mustard oil court fine for substandard mustard oil fflo:targets mustard oil fine of Rs 20,000 each under Section 51 of the FSSA for storing and selling substandard mustard oil Adulteration of mustard oil at New Kirana Store prov:wasAssociatedWith Meena Meena, the authorised representative of Mahadev Enterprises Laboratory analysis of mustard oil sample fso:isPerformedOn Sample of mustard oil from New Kirana Store sent it for laboratory testing mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant substandard mustard oil analysis report of the sample revealed that the oil was not only substandard Court fine for Ansar Mallick and Meena fflo:targets mustard oil imposed a Rs 25,000 fine each for storing and selling substandard mustard oil manufacturing of substandard mustard oil prov:wasAssociatedWith SK Oils Limited oil was manufactured by SK Oils Limited court fine for endangering public health fflo:targets mustard oil fine of Rs 5,000 each under Section 59 (i) of the Act for endangering public health39:Tee8,Coconut oil price skyrockets, crosses Rs 500 per litre newindianexpress.com KOCHI: As Keralites start preparations for Onam celebrations, the rising prices of essentials, especially coconut and coconut oil, are worrying families. The price of coconut oil which hovered around Rs 160 per litre a year ago has crossed Rs 500, making it out of bounds for common man. Coconut oil has been deeply ingrained in the state’s culture and traditions that it is an inevitable ingredient for its traditional cuisine.
Meanwhile, the sale of other products like groundnut oil and palm oil has increased as coconut oil has become unaffordable. There are reports that adulterated coconut oil is flooding the market posing a health risk.
Kerafed, the largest producer of coconut oil in the country has hiked the price of coconut oil to Rs 529 per litre while the price of many popular brands has crossed Rs 600. The price of coconut in the retail market ranges between Rs 75 to Rs 85 per kg.
“There will not be any scarcity of coconut oil during Onam season as we have maintained an average stock of 912.2 metric tonnes of copra from January to June,” said Kerafed managing director Saju Surendran.
Farmers say they get an average price of Rs 62 per kg, which is a bumper price considering the fact that the procurement rate was just Rs 8 per kg a couple of years back. Though the steep rise in procurement rate has brought cheers, farmers are unable to reap the benefit as the production has declined to a fraction of the previous year yield.
“The coconut prices have gone up due to drop in production caused by drought in 2024. Now the production has started increasing thanks to copious rains in the previous months. The crisis is expected to end by December 2025 and the prices may decline thereafter,” said Dinesh a farmer in Palakkad.
“There has been a steep decline in coconut production which has affected our business. We have rescheduled the production to a single shift due to shortage of coconut. The company has not exported coconut oil for the past two months.
There are many reasons like the spike in demand for desiccated coconut powder and coconut milk in the USA, rise in demand for tender coconut in North India and West Asia and the dip in production,” said Varappetty Cooperative Society president M G Ramakrishnan.
The rise in price of coconut oil has pushed the catering and bakery industry into crisis as they are not able to compromise on quality and pricing due to stiff competition.
“We purchase around 1,000 litres of coconut oil per month and the price hike has brought an additional burden of Rs 3 lakh. We are unable to hike the prices due to competition. Coconut and coconut oil are important ingredients that decide the taste of the Sadya and we cannot shift to cheaper products,” said All Kerala Caterers Association treasurer M G Sreevatsan.
“The price of coconut oil has crossed Rs 500 per litre and we are forced to increase the price of banana chips. The price of chips has increased from Rs 428 to Rs 560 per kg during the past two months,” said K S Rajendran of Kalarickal Chips and Spices in Alappuzha.
Refuting allegations that spike in procurement of coconut by China is the reason for the scarcity, sources at the Coconut Development Board said production has dropped in all coconut producing countries. “China procures coconut from Indonesia as the prices are half that of India. But the situation is gradually changing as production has increased in the past two weeks. Prices will start stabilising now and will normalise in another two months,” said an official. coconut oil adulteration unknown suspected Kochi, Ernakulam, Kerala, India adulterated coconut oil fflo:causesEffect health risk adulterated coconut oil is flooding the market posing a health risk3a:Te23,Maharashtra News: Minister Narhari Zirwal Announces Suspension Of 2 FDA Officials, Closure Of Nandurbar Factory Over Oil Adulteration freepressjournal.in Mumbai, Jul 7: Maharashtra Food and Civil Supplies Minister Narhari Zirwal on Monday announced immediate suspension of two Food and Drug Administration (FDA) officials and closure of a factory in Nandurbar district found guilty several times of oil adulteration.
Replying to a question raised by Shiv Sena MLA Amshya Padvi in the assembly, Zirwal said the joint commissioner and assistant commissioner of FDA would be suspended for failing to act promptly against the factory in Akkalkuwa despite multiple instances of adulteration being reported.
Supplementary questions were raised by legislator Sameer Kunawar, who pointed out that samples of soybean and groundnut oil collected recently from the same factory were found to be adulterated.
"Swift action was expected, but the concerned officers failed to act, which has now resulted in disciplinary action. Officials found responsible in the case of substandard edible oil in Nandurbar district will be suspended, and the concerned company will be shut down," Zirwal informed the House.
On March 10, FDA officials inspected Gopal Provision, a firm based in Akkalkuwa, where samples of Mahika brand refined soybean oil and Kamla brand groundnut oil were collected for testing, with preliminary reports finding these to be non-compliant with food safety standards, the minister said.
As the vendor appealed against the findings, the samples have now been sent for re-analysis to Central Food Technological Research Institute (CFTRI) in Mysuru in Karnataka, Zirwal said in the assembly.
During 2024-25, a total of 12 edible oil samples were collected in Nandurbar district, out of which five were declared substandard, with legal proceedings initiated under Food Safety and Standards Act 2006 in two of these cases.
Reports from referral laboratories are awaited in the the remaining three, Zirwal said while assuring strict action against violators of food safety regulations.
In a separate discussion, Minister-in-Charge Shambhuraj Desai informed the assembly that a panel of architects and financial experts has been appointed to study the redevelopment of 81 buildings under the Umarkhadi Redevelopment Committee in Mumbai.
The report is expected within three months, after which a decision will be taken, Desai said.
Assembly Speaker Rahul Narwekar, during proceedings, directed that a report on alleged irregularities in the procurement and distribution of rice under the public distribution system (PDS) be submitted to the House before the end of the current session.
The directive followed complaints raised by senior Congress leader Nana Patole regarding large-scale corruption in the PDS supply chain.
(Disclaimer: Except for the headline, this article has not been edited by FPJ's editorial team and is auto-generated from an agency feed.) soybean oil groundnut oil adulteration substandard suspension closure suspected Akkalkuwa, Nandurbar, Maharashtra, India re-analysis fso:isPerformedAt Central Food Technological Research Institute samples have now been sent for re-analysis to Central Food Technological Research Institute Kamla brand groundnut oil fflo:belongsToCategory Edible Oils Kamla brand groundnut oil Oil Adulteration Act at Gopal Provision prov:used groundnut oil samples of Mahika brand refined soybean oil and Kamla brand groundnut oil were collected substandard edible oil finding fflo:triggeredAction legal proceedings five were declared substandard, with legal proceedings initiated3b:Ta02,Substandard edible oil found in Nandurbar: Minister warns of action indianexpress.com Several edible oil samples collected in Nandurbar district have failed to meet food safety standards, and action will be taken against the guilty, Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Minister Narhari Zirwal informed the Maharashtra Legislative Assembly during Question Hour on Monday.
The matter was raised by MLA Aamshya Padvi, with follow-up questions from members Sameer Kunawar and Hiraman Khoskar.
Responding to the question in the Lower House, Minister Zirwal said that on March 10, the FDA inspected the Gopal Provision Store in Akkalkuwa.
During the inspection, samples of Mahika brand refined soybean oil and Kamla brand groundnut oil were collected for testing.
Preliminary reports indicated that the samples were substandard as per food safety norms.
Following an appeal by the vendor, the samples were sent for further analysis to the Central Food Technological Research Institute (CFTRI) in Mysuru.
Zirwal added that in the financial year 2024–25, 12 edible oil samples were tested in the district, of which five were found to be of inferior quality.
“Out of these, legal action has been initiated in two cases under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. The remaining three are awaiting final reports from referral laboratories,” the minister said.
Zirwal told the House that strict measures will be taken against those found violating food safety norms.
Meanwhile, Women and Child Welfare Minister Aditi Tatkare also ordered the suspension of a zilla parishad CEO after it was found that an anganwadi worker was drawing salary on behalf of a deceased worker in Nandurbar’s Akkalkuwa district. edible oil refined soybean oil groundnut oil substandard Legal action under Food Safety and Standards Act suspected Nandurbar, Maharashtra, India Substandard edible oil finding in Nandurbar fflo:inRegion Nandurbar Substandard edible oil found in Nandurbar Substandard edible oil finding in Nandurbar fflo:foundIn groundnut oil samples of Mahika brand refined soybean oil and Kamla brand groundnut oil were collected for testing. Preliminary reports indicated that the samples were substandard Substandard edible oil finding in Nandurbar fflo:producedBy LaboratoryTest samples were sent for further analysis to the Central Food Technological Research Institute Substandard edible oil finding in Nandurbar fflo:triggeredAction Legal action under Food Safety and Standards Act legal action has been initiated in two cases under the Food Safety and Standards Act3c:Tf76,Maharashtra News: Rural Development Minister Jaikumar Gore Announces Suspension Of 2 Engineers Over Irregular Payments freepressjournal.in Mumbai, July 7: Maharashtra Rural Development Minister Jaikumar Gore on Monday in the state council announced the suspension of two engineers from public work departments under the jurisdiction of Chhatrapati Sambhajinagar Zilla Parishad.
The department engineer and executive engineer were suspended for paying Rs 1.47 crore to the contractor even before the commencement of the construction of the school in Lasur village and the building of the primary health centre at Gurdhanora village from Chhatrapati Sambhajinagar.
The minister, in his reply to questions by Satish Chavan (NCP) and the Leader of the Opposition, Ambadas Danve, said that further action will be taken against the concerned engineers after the completion of the departmental inquiry in two months.
Minister Gore said that an inquiry has been conducted regarding this construction, and the assessment of the work has been recorded in the measurement book for more than the actual work done. Payments have been approved even without photos and test reports of the work. These payments have been made despite the standard operating procedure about when and how the payment should be made.
Meanwhile, Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Narahari Zirwal announced that two department officers will be suspended in connection with the supply of substandard edible oil in the tribal-dominated Nandurbar district of North Maharashtra. The suspension of these two officers is being done based on the findings of the department’s inspection of some edible oil samples to be of substandard quality.
He told the state assembly that the department will initiate action for the closure of the concerned company, which has produced and distributed substandard edible oil. He was replying to a question raised by Shiv Sena legislator Amshaya Padvi Sameer Kunawar and Hiraman Khoskar.
During inspection, samples of Mahika brand refined soybean oil and Kamala brand peanut oil were collected for analysis
According to the preliminary report received, these samples were found to be non-conforming as per food safety standards. As the seller appealed, the samples have been sent to the Central Food Technological Research Institute, Mysore, for re-analysis, said Minister Zirwal.
During the year 2024-25, a total of 12 samples of edible oil were tested in the Nandurbar district and out of them, five samples were declared of substandard quality. In two of these cases, action is underway under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006, and the remaining three samples are awaiting the test report from the referral laboratory, he said, adding that strict action will be taken against those violating food safety rules.
(Disclaimer: Except for the headline, this article has not been edited by FPJ's editorial team and is auto-generated from an agency feed.) soybean oil peanut oil substandard suspension closure suspected Nandurbar, Maharashtra, India IncidentFinding_Mahika_Nandurbar fflo:inRegion Nandurbar district supply of substandard edible oil in the tribal-dominated Nandurbar district IncidentFinding_Kamala_Nandurbar fflo:inRegion Nandurbar district supply of substandard edible oil in the tribal-dominated Nandurbar district re-analysis of oil samples fso:isPerformedAt Central Food Technological Research Institute, Mysore sent to the Central Food Technological Research Institute, Mysore, for re-analysis IncidentFinding_Mahika_Nandurbar fflo:triggeredAction RegulatoryAction_Closure_Company department will initiate action for the closure of the concerned company RegulatoryAction_Closure_Company fflo:targets concerned company closure of the concerned company, which has produced and distributed substandard edible oil Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 fflo:appliesToFood edible oil action is underway under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 20063d:Ta97,Coconut oil prices on the boil as retail price soars to ₹410/litre thehindubusinessline.com Coconut oil prices continue to boil with its retail prices reaching ₹410 per litre, up ₹80 in the past week.
Citing declining production of copra as a reason for prices to surge, Thalath Mahmood, president of Cochin Oil Merchant Association (COMA) told businessline
Copra prices also moved northwards to touch ₹231 per kg in Kerala market, while the Tamil Nadu rates stood at ₹227.
Adulteration rears its head
However, he said the Israel-Iran conflict is likely to push up the cost of these edible oils as imports become costlier because of the anticipated hike in freight rates. He alleged that the rising coconut oil price has also led to the availability of inferior and adulterated oils in the market, manufactured by solvent extraction, low-quality and fungus-hit copra in the domestic market.
He also requested the government to take necessary steps to curb the sale of adulterated coconut oil in the market.
The association will soon approach the Centre to lift import restrictions of coconut oil and copra in view of the crisis being faced by the industry due to acute shortage of the raw material.
K.K.Devraj, a consultant in the industry, pointed out that the presence of adulterated coconut was becoming rampant and the recent banning of 42 brands of coconut oil was a welcome step. The shortage of copra and coconuts is likely to push the prices of coconut oil to ₹500 by Onam. But the recent reduction in import duty on crude vegetable oils may control this upward trend, he said.
Raw coconut prices shoot up
Palmolein, which is widely used in Kerala, has started showing a downward trend, and the ripple effect will be there in the coconut oil market as well, especially since the price difference between coconut oil and other vegetable oils will push down coconut oil prices.
It would be healthy for coconut oil prices to come down to reasonable levels since reverse shifting of consumers from sunflower oil and blended oil back to coconut oil may not take place as expected. Ultimately, the coconut oil industry which largely depends on the edible user segment may be the loser in the long run, he said.
Official sources said that raw coconut prices have reached ₹70 per kg due to declining production. Exports of coconut and other value added products are on the rise to cater to the increased demand, thanks to signing of FTA’s.
Published on June 17, 2025 coconut oil adulteration substandard inferior and adulterated oils banning of 42 brands of coconut oil alleged Kerala, India banning of 42 brands of coconut oil fflo:targets coconut oil recent banning of 42 brands of coconut oil3e:Td8b,AMC seizes 105 tins of suspicious cooking oil from Behrampura - The Times of India indiatimes.com Ahmedabad: On Friday, the health department of the Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation (AMC) conducted a raid at the packaging unit of Milan Oils Pvt Ltd, located near Chandola Lake in the Behrampura area of the city. The health department collected samples of refined palm oil (Gujarat brand) and refined soybean oil (Ananta brand) from the packaged tins and sent them to a food laboratory for testing. 
Due to suspicions about the cooking oil, 105 tins, comprising 90 tins of refined palm oil (Gujarat brand) and 15 tins of refined soybean oil (Ananta brand), were seized. These tins will remain confiscated until the test results of the samples from these two brands are received.
Additionally, between April 15 and 26, the department inspected 916 units across various areas of the city, issuing notices to 349 units for violations of regulations. They destroyed 529 kilograms of inedible food and 608 litres of inedible liquid. 
A total of 195 TPC tests were conducted. On April 16, an inspection at a vegetable chutney manufacturing unit in the Bapunagar area found unhygienic conditions, leading to the sealing of the facility. 
On the same day, a complaint was received about an insect found in a dish served to a customer at Shashwat Hospitality (TSF) on the Iskcon-Ambli Road in the Jodhpur area, prompting the sealing of the restaurant due to unhygienic conditions.
From April 15 to 26, the health department conducted inspections in various areas of the city, collecting 163 food samples. These included 11 samples of milk products, 4 bakery product samples, 36 samples of gram flour sweets, 19 samples of mango juice and other beverages, 5 samples of cold drinks, 5 samples of cooking oil, 14 spice samples, and 69 samples of other food items, all sent to a food laboratory for testing.
On Saturday, the health department announced the results of food samples taken from three different units in the city. The sample of malai paneer from Baba Deep Singh Restaurant on Naroda-Dehgam Road was declared unsafe. Meanwhile, the strawberry ice cream sample from Yashvi Beverages in Paldi and the refined palm oil sample from Milan Oil Depot in Jamalpur were declared substandard.
While the health department conducts inspections in various units across Ahmedabad city, samples of packaged snacks are not taken. Additionally, samples of various well-known ice creams or branded cold drinks are not collected. Although the sale of branded ice creams and cold drinks increases during the summer, their samples are not regularly taken. refined palm oil refined soybean oil substandard seizure suspected Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India Sealing of vegetable chutney unit fflo:targets vegetable chutney inspection at a vegetable chutney manufacturing unit Seizure of 105 tins fflo:targets refined soybean oil 15 tins of refined soybean oil (Ananta brand), were seized Sealing of vegetable chutney unit fflo:issuedBy Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation leading to the sealing of the facility milk products sample fflo:collectedAt Retail collecting 163 food samples. These included 11 samples of milk products bakery product sample fflo:collectedAt Retail 4 bakery product samples gram flour sweets sample fflo:collectedAt Retail 36 samples of gram flour sweets malai paneer fflo:hasAdulterant unsafe condition sample of malai paneer from Baba Deep Singh Restaurant was declared unsafe3f:T1783,Health dept seizes 352 boxes of refined oil after 6 hospitalised hindustantimes.com Health dept seizes 352 boxes of refined oil after 6 hospitalised
Test results show Vitamin D toxicity in patients who hail from 2 Rajpura villages; according to the communication of the PGIMER, Chandigarh, with the Patiala health department, preliminary analysis of an oil sample linked to the cases has revealed abnormally high levels of Vitamin D.
Six people from two villages near Rajpura town were rushed to the PGIMER, Chandigarh, in critical condition last week after they consumed refined soyabean oil with high levels of Vitamin D, supporting the hypothesis of a shared source of Vitamin D toxicity.
The six patients, including two children, were admitted to the PGIMER, Chandigarh, after experiencing acute symptoms of vomiting and weakness. During their treatment, the PGIMER alerted the Patiala health department that all the six patients fell ill due to hypervitaminosis D, known as vitamin D toxicity.
According to the communication of the PGIMER, Chandigarh, with the Patiala health department, preliminary analysis of an oil sample linked to the cases has revealed abnormally high levels of Vitamin D.
Hypervitaminosis D is an acute medical condition that is caused by consuming excessive amounts of vitamin D, leading to dangerously high blood calcium levels (hypercalcemia). This can damage kidneys, bones, and soft tissues over time.
Patiala health department officials said on Monday that the affected patients, two children from Alluna and four adults from Bhedwal village near Rajpura town in Patiala district, were admitted to the PGIMER last week.
They had consumed ‘Binni’ refined oil purchased from a karyana store in Bhedwal village, they said.
Dr Divjot Singh, district epidemiologist, said, “Public announcements have been made in villages to stop using the refined oil of Binni brand. Our health workers in the area are on alert. We have not detected any other cases so far.”
Health officials said that the refined oil reportedly had a high level of vitamin D, adding that the karyana store owner claimed that he had received packaged oil from Rajpura town.
Officials said that a survey had already been conducted in both the villages, but no other case had been detected there.
Meanwhile, the food wing of the Patiala health department also swung into action and collected samples of the ‘Binni’ refined oil.
Dr Gurpreet Kaur, district health officer, said, “We have already confiscated 352 boxes and 13 bottles of the refined oil. We have removed the harmful product from circulation. Samples of the seized products have been collected and sent for laboratory analysis to the state food lab in Kharar. Legal steps will be taken in accordance with the food safety laws once the investigation concludes.”
- Karam Prakash is a Patiala-based senior correspondent covering several districts of Malwa region of Punjab. He writes on various domains, including health, agriculture, power and education. refined soyabean oil Binni refined oil adulteration contamination Vitamin D confiscation public announcement suspected Rajpura, Patiala, Punjab, India refined soyabean oil fflo:hasAdulterant Vitamin D consumed refined soyabean oil with high levels of Vitamin D Vitamin D fflo:causesEffect hypervitaminosis D patients fell ill due to hypervitaminosis D, known as vitamin D toxicity abnormally high levels of Vitamin D fso:isResultOf preliminary analysis of an oil sample preliminary analysis of an oil sample linked to the cases has revealed abnormally high levels of Vitamin D preliminary analysis of an oil sample fflo:identifies Vitamin D preliminary analysis of an oil sample linked to the cases has revealed abnormally high levels of Vitamin D Vitamin D fflo:causesEffect Hypervitaminosis D Hypervitaminosis D is an acute medical condition that is caused by consuming excessive amounts of vitamin D confiscation of 352 boxes and 13 bottles of refined oil fflo:targets refined oil confiscated 352 boxes and 13 bottles of the refined oil hypervitaminosis D fflo:hasEffectType fflo:AcuteEffect experiencing acute symptoms of vomiting and weakness preliminary analysis of an oil sample fso:isPerformedAt PGIMER, Chandigarh preliminary analysis of an oil sample linked to the cases has revealed preliminary analysis of an oil sample fso:isPerformedOn refined soyabean oil preliminary analysis of an oil sample linked to the cases Vitamin D fflo:detectedBy fflo:LaboratoryTest preliminary analysis of an oil sample linked to the cases has revealed Hypervitaminosis D fflo:hasEffectType fflo:AcuteEffect Hypervitaminosis D is an acute medical condition Hypervitaminosis D fflo:causesEffect hypercalcemia leading to dangerously high blood calcium levels (hypercalcemia) Hypervitaminosis D fflo:causesEffect kidney damage This can damage kidneys, bones, and soft tissues over time Hypervitaminosis D fflo:causesEffect bone damage This can damage kidneys, bones, and soft tissues over time Hypervitaminosis D fflo:causesEffect soft tissue damage This can damage kidneys, bones, and soft tissues over time Binni refined oil fflo:hasAdulterant Vitamin D the refined oil reportedly had a high level of vitamin D vitamin D fflo:foundAt Retail purchased from a karyana store in Bhedwal village Hypervitaminosis D incident in Patiala fflo:inRegion Alluna two children from Alluna confiscation of 352 boxes and 13 bottles of refined oil fflo:issuedBy Patiala health department We have already confiscated 352 boxes and 13 bottles of the refined oil. laboratory analysis of seized refined oil samples fso:isPerformedAt state food lab in Kharar sent for laboratory analysis to the state food lab in Kharar laboratory analysis fso:isPerformedOn seized refined oil samples Samples of the seized products have been collected and sent for laboratory analysis legal steps in accordance with food safety laws fflo:issuedBy Patiala health department Legal steps will be taken in accordance with the food safety laws40:T7da,Fake oil found in Bihar, here's how to spot it. indiatoday.in A cordial exchange between Russian President Vladimir Putin and American architect Rodney Cook Jr. at the St. Petersburg International Economic Forum highlighted cultural ties amid broader US-Russia tensions. Speaking during a session moderated by Geeta Mohan, Cook said St. Petersburg’s famed ballrooms, cathedrals and palaces had long influenced his architectural work, including the planned White House ballroom project.
Fake oil found in Bihar, here's how to spot it.
Fake oil containers were seized in Rohtas district, Bihar. Watch to know how to spot the difference between real and fake oil.
OTHER VIDEOS FROM Mo.Of.Everything
Russian President Vladimir Putin underscored the enduring strategic partnership between Russia and India during a discussion on military and technical cooperation at the St. Petersburg International Economic Forum (SPIEF). He noted that a substantial share of India's military equipment is of Russian origin, reflecting decades of close defence collaboration. Emphasising the trust between the two nations, Putin said their relationship extends beyond simple trade and arms sales. He cited the BrahMos supersonic missile as a successful example of joint research and development. Putin also revealed that Russia remains willing to sell its Su-57 fighter jet to India, despite an earlier joint development programme not materialising.
Russian President Vladimir Putin hailed Prime Minister Narendra Modi's leadership and said under his leadership any threats of sanctions would boomerang.
Watch as Russian President Vladimir Putin responds to this and more at the St Petersburg International Economic Forum (SPIEF), which was moderated by India Today's Foreign Affairs Editor Geeta Mohan on Friday. edible oil counterfeit substandard seizure suspected Rohtas district, Bihar, India Fake oil seizure in Rohtas district fflo:inRegion Rohtas district, Bihar Fake oil containers were seized in Rohtas district, Bihar.41:T126f,Crackdown on food adulteration: 112 kg rice bran oil destroyed, substandard sauces seized in Lucknow hindustantimes.com Crackdown on food adulteration: 112 kg rice bran oil destroyed, substandard sauces seized in Lucknow
Upon examination, the FSDA team found that the vegetable and soy sauces were adulterated with potato pulp; samples sent for analysis
LUCKNOW The Food Safety and Drug Administration (FSDA) conducted multiple raids across the city on Tuesday and Monday, seizing large quantities of substandard and adulterated food items as part of a crackdown on illegal food practices that compromise public health.
On Tuesday, FSDA’s vigilance led to the seizure of 112kg of rice bran oil that was being manufactured under unhygienic conditions at a unit on TS Mishra Road, near Kakori. The oil, which was intended for sale, was found stored in filthy conditions, prompting the team to confiscate and destroy it immediately. Officials also seized various food items, including cookies, milk, paneer, sabudana papad, kachari, khoya, and mustard oil from multiple establishments across the city.
“A total of 112kg rice bran oil, meant for sale, was stored in filthy conditions, which is why it was seized. We are also conducting searches to ensure that no other stock of this oil has been dumped into the market,” said assistant commissioner (food) Vijay Pratap Singh.
On Monday, another team from FSDA raided a firm in Mahona, Bakshi Ka Talab, uncovering a large-scale adulteration operation. Officials found adulterated and substandard vegetable and soy sauces being produced and stored in poor conditions. A substantial stock of these sauces, along with large quantities of ‘Taza Brand’ salt, was seized. The FSDA team halted operations and issued a notice to the owner of the firm. Samples of the adulterated sauces and salt were sent for analysis.
Singh said the raid also revealed 44 tins of inferior and adulterated jaggery syrup, which were seized. Upon examination, the FSDA team found that the vegetable and soy sauces were adulterated with potato pulp. As a result, 130 cans of vegetable sauce worth ₹13,000 and 13 cans of soy sauce worth ₹1,500 were confiscated. The raid also saw the seizure of 20 bags of substandard ‘Taza Brand’ salt, valued at around ₹10,000.
The FSDA collected 30 samples from this raid, all of which were sent for laboratory testing.
The agency has deployed six teams to conduct surprise inspections across markets in the city. Since March 7, they have been working to inspect food items in various markets, including khoya markets in Charbagh and Thakurganj. Over 220 samples have been collected from different establishments across the city in just five days of the crackdown. These samples are currently being tested in laboratories to determine their quality and safety for public consumption.
In a related operation, the FSDA also targeted several dairies manufacturing paneer and khoya, resulting in the destruction of around 40kg of paneer in Rajajipuram that was found to be unfit for consumption on Tuesday. rice bran oil substandard unsafe_food seizure destruction alleged Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India vegetable sauce fflo:hasAdulterant potato pulp vegetable and soy sauces were adulterated with potato pulp soy sauce fflo:hasAdulterant potato pulp vegetable and soy sauces were adulterated with potato pulp vegetable sauce fflo:hasAdulterationMethod addition of potato pulp adulterated with potato pulp vegetable sauce fflo:hasAdulterant potato pulp vegetable and soy sauces were adulterated with potato pulp soy sauce fflo:hasAdulterant potato pulp vegetable and soy sauces were adulterated with potato pulp soy sauce fflo:hasAdulterant potato pulp vegetable and soy sauces were adulterated with potato pulp notice to the owner of the firm fflo:issuedBy FSDA issued a notice to the owner of the firm paneer unfit finding fflo:foundAtStep Processing paneer in Rajajipuram that was found to be unfit for consumption paneer unfit finding fflo:foundAtStep Processing paneer in Rajajipuram that was found to be unfit paneer unfit finding fflo:foundAtStep Processing paneer in Rajajipuram that was found to be unfit paneer unfit finding fflo:foundAtStep Processing paneer in Rajajipuram that was found to be unfit for consumption paneer unfit for consumption finding fflo:foundAtStep Processing dairies manufacturing paneer and khoya paneer unfit finding fflo:foundAtStep fflo:Processing dairies manufacturing paneer and khoya paneer unfit finding fflo:foundAtStep Processing paneer in Rajajipuram that was found to be unfit for consumption paneer unfit finding fflo:foundAtStep Processing paneer in Rajajipuram that was found to be unfit for consumption42:T7bd,Shop owner held for selling expired edible oils with tampered labels siasat.com Hyderabad: A 51-year-old man was arrested by the Hyderabad police and the food safety officials for allegedly repacking and selling expired edible oils with altered labels.
The accused has been identified as Ashok Kumar Agarwal, resident of Kachiguda.
During the raid at Sri Ganesh Balaji Lakkadatar Oil at Sri Krupa Market, Malakpet, officials seized 1,014 litres of edible oil worth Rs 1.90 lakh. The accused was found using whiteners to erase expiry dates and batch numbers on packaging, despite lacking a repacking license.
Seized items included 39 bottles (5 litres each) and 27 bottles (2 litres each) of Fresh Heart brand oil with tampered expiry dates, along with 51 tins (15 litres each), some of which had no date stickers.
According to reports, the accused was purchasing oils in bulk, repacking them with falsified labels, and selling them for profit.
The confiscated stock and the accused were handed over to the Food Safety Officer, GHMC Malakpet, for legal action.
Further investigation is ongoing. edible oil Fresh Heart brand oil substandard mislabeling counterfeit arrest seizure legal action alleged Hyderabad, Telangana, India repacking and selling expired edible oils with altered labels prov:used edible oil repacking and selling expired edible oils Fresh Heart brand oil fflo:belongsToCategory Oils Fresh Heart brand oil repacking and selling expired edible oils with altered labels fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling selling expired edible oils with altered labels repacking and selling expired edible oils with altered labels fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional using whiteners to erase expiry dates and batch numbers edible oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod erasing expiry dates and batch numbers using whiteners to erase expiry dates and batch numbers on packaging erasing expiry dates and batch numbers fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling erase expiry dates and batch numbers on packaging43:T8cd,Edible oil racket busted, 1 arrested in joint drive thehansindia.com Hyderabad: The Hyderabad Commissioner’s Task Force, South-East Team, along with the Food Safety Officials, raided a shop in Mahaboob Mansion, Malakpet, and apprehended a person for repacking and selling edible oils with expired labels and using whitener on labels to suppress the expiry date and batch numbers without a repacking license. The police seized expired products worth Rs 1.9 lakh.
The arrested person was identified as Ashok Kumar Agarwal (51), owner of Sri Ganesh Balaji Lakkadatar Oil. The police seized 161 bottles and 31 tins, 1,014 litres of oil.  
According to the police, on Monday, the Task Force team, along with the Food Safety officials, raided Sri Ganesh Balaji Lakkadatar Oil in Sri Krupa Market. A thorough inquiry revealed that Agarwal was purchasing edible oils in bulk and repacking them without a repacking license. He concealed the expiry date and batch numbers on labels by using whiteners and supplying oil to needy customers and gaining profits illegally. The officials seized 1,014 litres of oil worth Rs 1.9 lakh. He, along with seized material, was handed over to FSO, GHMC, Circle-VI, Malakpet, for further action. edible oil mislabeling substandard unsafe_food raid arrest seizure alleged Hyderabad, Telangana, India repacking edible oils without license prov:used edible oil repacking and selling edible oils with expired labels and using whitener on labels to suppress the expiry date and batch numbers without a repacking license repacking edible oils without license prov:wasAssociatedWith Ashok Kumar Agarwal Agarwal was purchasing edible oils in bulk and repacking them without a repacking license using whitener on labels to suppress expiry date fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling using whitener on labels to suppress the expiry date and batch numbers Ashok Kumar Agarwal prov:wasAssociatedWith repacking and selling edible oils with expired labels apprehended a person for repacking and selling edible oils with expired labels seized expired products fflo:foundAtStep Retail raided a shop in Mahaboob Mansion, Malakpet using whitener on labels fflo:hasFraudType Masking using whitener on labels to suppress the expiry date and batch numbers44:T179b,Shop owner held for selling expired edible oils with tampered labels in Hyderabad etemaaddaily.com Urdu
Matrimonials
Classifieds
مزید دریافت کریں
Geographic Reference
City & Local Guides
مزید دریافت کریں
City & Local Guides
Geographic Reference
World
Business
Sports
Entertainment
Health
Crime
Edu and Jobs
Politics
Photos
Videos
Menu
Home
>
World
>
Hyderabad
National
International
Specials
Thu 01 Jan 1970
مزید دریافت کریں
Geographic Reference
City & Local Guides
Share
Tweet
No Comments For This Post, Be first to write a Comment.
Leave a Comment
Most viewed from
Hyderabad
Hyderabad begins Special Intensive Revision of electoral rolls...
KTR accuses Congress of pushing Telangana farmers into crisis...
No system yet to detect voters registered in two States, officials admit...
Hyderabad gets first footpath made entirely of recycled plastic paver blocks...
ABVP calls for state-wide school bandh on Tuesday, some schools already declare holiday...
Gulf Migrants’ Families Seek SIR Safeguards To Protect Votes of NRIs...
ABVP calls for state-wide school bandh on Tuesday...
BIS Raids Jewellery Store in Abids for Hallmarking Violations '1.6 kg gold seized'...
Two injured as car crashes into divider on Hyderabad ORR...
Tirupati pilgrimage boosts bus bookings from Hyderabad...
Man allegedly flees with gold worth Rs 20 cr in Hyderabad 'Jewellery Fraud'...
Janapriya Society secretary apologises for ‘Pakistani’ remark...
Most viewed from
World
Pranjal Patil, the country's first blind woman IAS officer...
12 Indians among 13 killed in Qatar gas plant explosion, 66 injured...
CRED founder Kunal Shah to become global CEO of WhatsApp...
15 killed in Lucknow fire at pet shop, gaming training centre, 4 arrested...
Google Data Centre Sparks Land Row As CPM Leader Alleges Illegal Allocation...
28 held for attempting irregularities in Bihar 'NEET retest'...
Massive Fire at Lucknow Coaching Centre Kills 14...
Indian, Bangladesh workers complain to Singapore ministry over unpaid wages...
Govt approves Rs 270 cr for Kavach automatic train protection system...
Fire breaks out at coaching centre in Lucknow...
PM SHRI Protest Turns Tense in Kerala, Police Use Water Cannons...
Keir Starmer announces his resignation as U.K. Prime Minister...
Todays Epaper
English Weekly
AIMIM News
Asaduddin Owaisi Demands EC Accept PAN, Driving Licence And Ration Cards For Verification In SIR
Jun 11, 2026
AIMIM Qutbullapur President Mohammed Muneeruddin interact with locals of Bachupally residents over absence of worship places
Jun 07, 2026
مزید دریافت کریں
Geographic Reference
City & Local Guides
Latest Urdu News
ٹمز اسپتال میں 122 جائیدادوں پر بھرتی کا نوٹیفکیشن جاری، درخواستیں 6 جولائی تک
حیدرآباد: گاندھی نگر کے سب انسپکٹر 50 ہزار روپے رشوت لیتے ہوئے اے سی بی کے ہاتھوں گرفتار
اداکار پرکاش راج کے خلاف ناقابلِ ضمانت وارنٹ جاری
حیدرآباد: اسپتال میں ڈیوٹی ڈاکٹر کاشف احمد مردہ پائے گئے، زہر کے انجکشن سے خودکشی کا شبہ
یوپی: محرم جلوس میں ’پاکستان زندہ باد‘ کے نعرے لگانے والا ہندو نوجوان نکلا
پرانجل پاٹل ملک کی پہلی نابینا خاتون آئی اے ایس آفیسر
لکھنؤ کوچنگ سینٹر میں خوفناک آتشزدگی، 15 افراد ہلاک، کئی زخمی
چھ نسلیں، 75 افراد اور 120 ایکڑ زمین: آندھرا پردیش کا مشترکہ خاندان اتحاد کی مثال
مسلم پرسنل لا بورڈ کا یو سی سی اور وندے ماترم کے خلاف قانونی جدوجہد کا اعلان
حیدرآباد: ڈیوٹی پر جانے والی سینئر  خاتون نرس ٹکر میں جاں بحق، ملزمان فرار
پربھنی ہنومان مندر میں المناک حادثہ، زیرِ تعمیر ہال کی چھت گرنے سے 7 ہلاک، 25 زخمی
بغیر ٹکٹ سفر کرنے والوں کے لیے بری خبر، جرمانہ دوگنا
امریکہ اور ایران کے درمیان تاریخی امن معاہدہ، جنگی کشیدگی کے خاتمے کا اعلان
حیدرآباد کے میڑچل میں خوفناک سڑک حادثہ، ایک ہی خاندان کے 3 افراد جاں بحق
نظام آباد کے 2 نوجوانوں پر اشرار کا حملہ
Most Viewed
San Francisco Turns to AI to Safeguard Whales From Ship Strikes
May 21, 2026
'US must respond': Trump admits Iran shot down Apache helicopter over Strait of Hormuz
Jun 10, 2026
Google 'North Korean hackers using AI to find cybersecurity blind spots'
May 12, 2026
Trump gives 'Clock ticking' warning to Iran, says to act fast or nothing will be left of them
May 17, 2026
Trump greets PM Modi on completing 12 years in office, says 'Strong, wise man'
Jun 11, 2026
Woman sets house on fire to frame relatives, dies of burns in UP
May 20, 2026
'Protect seafarers': PM flags sailors' safety at G7 Summit in Trump's presence
Jun 17, 2026
Sajjanar Launches India?s First AI Multilingual Complaint Recorder
May 23, 2026
Iran threatens to open new fronts against US and Israel amid deadlock, claims control over Hormuz
May 20, 2026
How do you feel about rising prices today?
Like Us
Etemaad Daily
Home
About Us
Advertise With Us
All Polls
Epaper Archives
Privacy Policy
Contact Us
Download Etemaad App
© 2026 Etemaad Daily News, All Rights Reserved. edible oil substandard mislabeling arrest alleged Hyderabad, Telangana, India Selling expired edible oils with tampered labels prov:wasAssociatedWith Shop owner Shop owner held for selling expired edible oils with tampered labels Selling expired edible oils with tampered labels prov:used edible oils selling expired edible oils with tampered labels Tampering labels on edible oils fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling tampered labels45:T87a,Shop owner arrested for selling expired edible oils thehindu.com A shop owner allegedly repacking and selling expired edible oils with tampered labels was arrested on Tuesday.
During the raid, officials seized a total of 1,014 litres of edible oil valued at approximately ₹1.90 lakh.
Following a tip off, the South-East Task Force team of the Commissioner’s Task Force, along with Food Safety officials, raided Sri Ganesh Balaji Lakkadatar Oil in Sri Krupa Market, Mahbub Mansion, Malakpet.
The shop owner, identified as Ashok Kumar Agarwal, 51, a resident of Kachiguda, was found repacking edible oil packets with expired labels and using whiteners to suppress expiry dates and batch numbers without a repacking licence.
The seized items included 39 bottles of Fresh Heart brand oil with expired date stickers (each containing five litres), 27 bottles of the same brand (each containing two litres), 13 tins (each containing 15 litres) with expired date stickers, and 38 tins (each containing 15 litres) without date stickers.
Preliminary investigation revealed that Agarwal was purchasing edible oils in bulk and repacking them with altered labels to mislead customers and make profits.
The seized the material, and the accused was handed over to the Food Safety Officer, Greater Hyderabad Municipal Corporation (GHMC), Malakpet, for further legal action.
Published - March 11, 2025 08:56 pm IST edible oil Fresh Heart brand oil substandard mislabeling arrest seizure alleged Hyderabad, Telangana, India repacking expired edible oils prov:used edible oil repacking edible oil packets with expired labels Fresh Heart brand oil fflo:belongsToCategory Oils 39 bottles of Fresh Heart brand oil repacking expired edible oils fflo:hasAdulterationMethod tampering labels selling expired edible oils with tampered labels tampering labels fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling repacking them with altered labels to mislead customers tampering labels fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional to mislead customers and make profits whiteners fflo:foundAt Retail using whiteners to suppress expiry dates masking expiry dates fflo:hasFraudType Masking using whiteners to suppress expiry dates46:T6a8,2,300kg of spurious paneer seized indiatimes.com Ahmedabad: More than 2,300kg of adulterated paneer was seized during a raid by a Food and Drug Control Administration (FDCA) team on Tuesday. The operation targeted Keshvi Food Products in Narsihpura in Kadi, Mehsana, which was allegedly manufacturing paneer without a valid food licence and using edible vegetable fat in its making.
During the raid, around 2,300kg of paneer, estimated to be worth around Rs 5.5 lakh, was seized on strong suspicion of adulteration in the interest of public health, officials said, adding that samples have been collected for laboratory analysis, and further legal action will be taken based on the test reports.
The seized paneer was reportedly being sold at approximately Rs 240 a kilogram to establishments around Ahmedabad, including Zamzam Restaurant and Hotel Sahyog in Viramgam; Musafir Restaurant in Kalol; Khodal Dhaba and Hotel Amiras and Hotel Satkar in Chhatral.
In a separate raid in Kadi, authorities seized around 1,600 kg of suspected adulterated cottonseed oil from Dharati Industries. The FDCA stated that these food items appeared unfit for consumption at first glance. "We have initiated a detailed investigation into the adulterated paneer manufacturing racket. We have begun collecting samples from hotels of highways to identify perpetrators," said Gujarat FDCA commissioner H G Koshia. cottonseed oil adulteration substandard seizure investigation suspected Kadi, Mehsana, Gujarat, India paneer fflo:hasAdulterant edible vegetable fat using edible vegetable fat in its making paneer adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Keshvi Food Products targeted Keshvi Food Products... manufacturing paneer47:T77c,Fake oil, other items worth Rs8.5 lakh seized | Nagpur News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Nagpur: Following a complaint about fake oil with labels and packaging of branded companies being sold, crime branch sleuths conducted a raid on Friday at a godown on Outer Ring Road in Hudkeshwar. 
Cops found a factory where local oil was being filled in bottles with labels of branded companies.
According to police, Anup Kolap (48), who hails from Mumbai, is currently working as a production inspector for branded oil companies. He received information that fake oil with labels of companies was being sold. So, he informed the crime branch, after which the raid was conducted. Police found 28 cans of oil, thousands of labels of branded companies, drums of oil, and a transport vehicle, all worth Rs7.6 lakh. 
Police seized all the material and even sent samples of oil for chemical analysis.
Cops have booked Nilesh Shahu, a resident of Hudkeshwar. Cops also learnt that he supplied the fake oil to some of the shopkeepers and took Rs1.5 lakh, which was also seized. 
The accused have been booked under relevant sections of BNS and the Copyright Act. Cops have not arrested the accused as it is a bailable offence but are questioning him. edible oil counterfeit substitution local oil raid seizure booking suspected Nagpur, Maharashtra, India chemical analysis fso:isPerformedOn samples of oil sent samples of oil for chemical analysis Fake oil production in Hudkeshwar prov:wasAssociatedWith Nilesh Shahu Cops have booked Nilesh Shahu, a resident of Hudkeshwar. Fake oil production in Hudkeshwar prov:used local oil Cops found a factory where local oil was being filled local oil fflo:foundAt godown on Outer Ring Road in Hudkeshwar Cops found a factory where local oil was being filled Fake oil production in Hudkeshwar prov:wasAssociatedWith Nilesh Shahu Cops have booked Nilesh Shahu, a resident of Hudkeshwar.48:T153d,Major crackdown on adulterated ghee and oil in Pokaran over 14000kg seized timesofindia.indiatimes.com JAISALMER: In a major action under the Rajasthan Government’s “Shuddh Aahar Milawat Par Vaar” campaign, authorities raided an illegal adulterated ghee and oil manufacturing unit in Pokaran late Sunday night and seized more than 14,000 kilograms of adulterated ghee and edible oil. 
The operation is being described as the largest crackdown on the fake ghee and oil trade in Jaisalmer district so far.
A special team from the Food Safety Department headquarters in Jaipur conducted a surprise raid at a residential property in Lodha Colony, Pokaran, where adulterated ghee and oil were being manufactured and packaged on a large scale. 
During the operation, officials collected 13 samples for testing and seized over 14,000 kilograms of suspected adulterated products.
The main accused reportedly fled from the spot before the raid. However, two workers found at the premises were detained and questioned. Investigators suspect the operation may be linked to a larger syndicate involved in the adulterated food business, with possible additional warehouses operating in Pokaran and nearby rural areas.
Confirming the action, Chief Medical and Health Officer (CMHO) Jaisalmer, Dr. 
Rajendra Kumar Paliwal, said the raid was carried out under the directions of Food Safety Commissioner Dr. T. Shubhamangala Rajasthan and under the leadership of Additional Commissioner (Food Safety) Bhagwat Singh, in coordination with the Jaisalmer health department.
Acting on specific intelligence, the team raided a premises belonging to Yogesh Tavari, owner of Satvik Trading Company, in Lodha Colony. Officials discovered large-scale manufacturing and packaging activities involving adulterated ghee and edible oils.
During the raid, five samples of adulterated ghee and oil were collected under the provisions of the Food Safety and Standards Act (FSS Act). Authorities seized approximately 10,260 kilograms of adulterated ghee, palm oil, soybean oil, and vanaspati from the site.
Subsequently, a raid was conducted at the company’s warehouse, where officials collected eight additional samples of adulterated ghee sold under various brands, including Aahar, Shubh, Kuber, Shrimool, Vinayak, and Topper Milk Fat. Around 4,000 kilograms of adulterated ghee were seized from the warehouse.
Officials stated that the case appears to involve large-scale food adulteration that poses a serious threat to public health.
The operation was carried out by Jaipur-based Food Safety Officers Vinod Sharma, Devendra Singh, Lokesh Sharma, and Jagdish Prasad, along with Jaisalmer Food Safety Officer Kishanaram Kadwasara.
According to Kadwasara, all ghee and oil samples have been sent to the Jaipur laboratory for analysis. Further action under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 will be initiated once the laboratory reports are received.
Authorities also recovered around 650 tins containing palm oil, soybean oil, and vanaspati ghee. In addition, iron containers, raw chemical materials, and modern sealing machines used for packaging were seized from the premises.
The Jaipur headquarters had received information that adulterated ghee and oil were being manufactured and supplied to markets on a large scale from Pokaran. When the special team arrived at the house in Lodha Colony, they found the main gate locked from the outside to avoid suspicion. However, upon entering the premises, officials discovered two workers actively engaged in packaging adulterated ghee and oil.
The investigation is ongoing, and officials are exploring possible links to a wider network involved in the production and distribution of adulterated food products across the region. ghee edible oil palm oil soybean oil vanaspati adulteration surprise raid seizure detention suspected Pokaran, Jaisalmer, Rajasthan, India surprise raid fflo:issuedBy Food Safety Department headquarters in Jaipur A special team from the Food Safety Department headquarters in Jaipur conducted a surprise raid adulteration of ghee and edible oils prov:wasAssociatedWith Yogesh Tavari Acting on specific intelligence, the team raided a premises belonging to Yogesh Tavari, owner of Satvik Trading Company, in Lodha Colony. Officials discovered large-scale manufacturing and packaging activities involving adulterated ghee and edible oils. analysis of ghee and oil samples fso:isPerformedAt Jaipur laboratory all ghee and oil samples have been sent to the Jaipur laboratory for analysis analysis of ghee and oil samples fso:isPerformedAt Jaipur laboratory all ghee and oil samples have been sent to the Jaipur laboratory for analysis manufacturing and packaging of adulterated ghee and oil prov:wasAssociatedWith illegal adulterated ghee and oil manufacturing unit in Pokaran adulterated ghee and oil were being manufactured and packaged 13 samples fflo:collectedAt Processing officials collected 13 samples for testing surprise raid fflo:targets ghee raided an illegal adulterated ghee and oil manufacturing unit surprise raid fflo:targets edible oil raided an illegal adulterated ghee and oil manufacturing unit adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt Processing discovered large-scale manufacturing and packaging activities involving adulterated ghee Food Safety and Standards Act fflo:appliesToFood edible oils collected under the provisions of the Food Safety and Standards Act (FSS Act)49:T12ca,Punjab &amp; Haryana high court asks Centre if they plan to open more labs to check cooking oil adulteration hindustantimes.com Punjab & Haryana high court asks Centre if they plan to open more labs to check cooking oil adulteration
The court was hearing a 2015 public interest litigation (PIL) by a Kapurthala resident Rajesh Gupta
The Punjab and Haryana high court (HC) has directed the Centre to apprise the court whether it has plans to open more laboratories to check adulteration of miscible oil in cooking oils available in the market.
Also Read: Adulterated mustard oil behind 3 dropsy deaths in Nabha: report
The HC bench of chief justice Sheel Nagu and justice Anil Kshetarpal termed it “unfortunate” that despite edible oils of different types being consumed in very large quantities throughout the country, the nearest laboratory to conduct the aforesaid test is situated nearly 1,500 kms from Chandigarh, in Nagpur.
Also Read: Delhi govt to intensify checks on food adulteration amid festive season
The court was hearing a 2015 public interest litigation (PIL) by a Kapurthala resident Rajesh Gupta, who had alleged that wholesale dealers, oil millers and wholesale traders in the trade of edible mustard oil were playing havoc with the lives of the people and providing ‘poison in the form of food’ which was not fit for human consumption by blatantly ignoring provisions of the Food Safety Act. “… various firms in Punjab were selling adulterated mustard oil by labelling it as ‘pure refined mustard oil’ which could be sold in the market for human consumption. Some firms were selling ‘refined rice bran oil’ as ‘mustard oil’ in order to deceive the public and maximise profits,” he had submitted, further alleging that the millers were working in violation of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006, and even Agmark, a certification mark, was being misused by traders in violation of the Act.
Also Read: Gautam Budh Nagar: 370 kg sweets, 750 ltr oil seized in food safety checks
During the course of the PIL, some samples were sent for examination to the Regional Agmark Laboratory, Amritsar. However, the lab said that the tests for other miscible oil as possible adulterants and percentage thereof were not performed as there was no availability of required facilities in this laboratory. For the same, samples can be sent to Central Agmark Laboratory, Nagpur, for analysis.
Additional solicitor general Satya Pal Jain, who was asked to check where samples could be sent, had told the court that the nearest laboratory where the test for other miscible oil can be conducted is the Central Agmark Laboratory, Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, North Ambajari Road, Nagpur.
The court expressed its displeasure over the lab being 1,500 km away from Chandigarh and asked Jain to apprise the court by January 22 as to what is the present policy of the central government and whether there is proposal for opening other laboratories across the country and if not then why. cooking oil miscible oil adulteration miscible oil Directive to Centre on lab expansion suspected Chandigarh, Punjab, India cooking oils fflo:hasAdulterant miscible oil check adulteration of miscible oil in cooking oils test for other miscible oil fso:isPerformedAt Central Agmark Laboratory nearest laboratory where the test for other miscible oil can be conducted is the Central Agmark Laboratory test for other miscible oil fso:isPerformedAt Central Agmark Laboratory test for other miscible oil can be conducted is the Central Agmark Laboratory miscible oil fflo:detectedBy test for other miscible oil test for other miscible oil can be conducted cooking oils fflo:belongsToCategory Oils edible oils of different types being consumed Directive to Centre on lab expansion fflo:issuedBy Punjab & Haryana High Court Punjab and Haryana high court (HC) has directed the Centre to apprise the court whether it has plans to open more laboratories PIL alleging mustard oil adulteration fflo:foundIn mustard oil selling adulterated mustard oil refined rice bran oil fflo:isSubstituteFor mustard oil selling 'refined rice bran oil' as 'mustard oil' PIL alleging mustard oil adulteration fflo:inRegion Punjab various firms in Punjab were selling adulterated mustard oil PIL alleging mustard oil adulteration fflo:foundAtStep Retail wholesale dealers, oil millers and wholesale traders selling refined rice bran oil as mustard oil fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling selling 'refined rice bran oil' as 'mustard oil' selling refined rice bran oil as mustard oil fflo:hasFraudType Substitution selling 'refined rice bran oil' as 'mustard oil' Analysis of mustard oil samples fso:isPerformedAt Regional Agmark Laboratory, Amritsar samples were sent for examination to the Regional Agmark Laboratory, Amritsar4a:Tfcf,Hc Questions Lack Of Local Testing Infra For Mustard Oil Adulteration | Chandigarh News - Times of India indiatimes.com Chandigarh: As cases of food adulteration rise, especially in edible oils, it is surprising that the region, including Punjab, Haryana, and Chandigarh, has no facility to check different parameters of adulteration in mustard oil. The nearest laboratory to check such parameters is in Nagpur, nearly 1,500 km from Chandigarh.
Taking note of this, the Punjab and Haryana high court has now asked the central govt to inform about its present policy and whether there is a proposal for opening other laboratories across the country, and if not, why.
Earlier in Oct this year, the HC, upon taking cognisance of the issue of adulteration of mustard oil, asked the registrar general of the HC to collect three samples of different popular brands and send them for quality testing to the nearest laboratory. Following the HC orders, the samples were sent to the Regional Agmark Laboratory, Amritsar.
When the matter came up for hearing before the HC on Dec 5, the HC was informed that the tests for other miscible oils as possible adulterants and their percentage were not performed due to the unavailability of required facilities in the laboratory at Amritsar. The court then asked for the nearest laboratory where such testing could be done.
During the hearing of the case again on Dec 11, Satya Pal Jain, additional solicitor general of India, after seeking instructions, informed that the nearest laboratory where the test for other miscible oils can be conducted is the Central Agmark Laboratory, Nagpur. âIt is unfortunate to note that despite edible oils of different types being consumed in very large quantities throughout the country, the nearest laboratory to conduct the aforesaid test is situated nearly 1,500 km from Chandigarh. This court will deal with this aspect at any subsequent hearing, but the additional solicitor general of India is directed to find out what the present policy of the central govt is and whether there is a proposal for opening other laboratories across the country, and if not, then why,â the HC directed after examining the issue.
In its order released on Friday, the division bench comprising Chief Justice Sheel Nagu and Justice Arun Khsetarpal also asked Jain to ensure that the test is conducted expeditiously, and a report is submitted before the next date of hearing. The matter has now been adjourned to Jan 22, 2025, for further hearing.
The HC ordered the sampling/testing of the mustard oil after hearing a large number of complaints received regarding the blending of mustard oil with other oils. mustard oil adulteration substitution other oils order to collect mustard oil samples for testing directive to find central govt policy suspected Chandigarh, Punjab and Haryana, India test for other miscible oils fso:isPerformedAt Central Agmark Laboratory, Nagpur nearest laboratory where the test for other miscible oils can be conducted is the Central Agmark Laboratory, Nagpur mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant other oils complaints received regarding the blending of mustard oil with other oils mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant miscible oils tests for other miscible oils as possible adulterants quality testing fso:isPerformedAt Regional Agmark Laboratory, Amritsar send them for quality testing to the nearest laboratory Punjab and Haryana high court fflo:issuedBy order to collect mustard oil samples for testing HC, upon taking cognisance of the issue of adulteration of mustard oil, asked the registrar general of the HC to collect three samples mustard oil fflo:belongsToCategory edible oils cases of food adulteration rise, especially in edible oils blending of mustard oil with other oils fflo:hasFraudType Dilution blending of mustard oil with other oils Central Agmark Laboratory, Nagpur fso:hasLocation Nagpur Central Agmark Laboratory, Nagpur HC directive to find central govt policy fflo:issuedBy Punjab and Haryana High Court the HC directed after examining the issue4b:Tb94,Dahod Police Bust Major Spurious Cooking Oil Racket, Seize Goods Worth Over Rs 15 Lakhs | Vadodara News - Times of India indiatimes.com Vadodara: After the discovery of a fake govt office and the forgery of non-agriculture land orders, a racket involving the sale of spurious cooking oil has emerged in Dahod. The special operations group (SOG) of Dahod police effected a major seizure of suspected spurious cooking oil from a unit at an industrial estate near the town. 
The raid on the unit at the Karedi GIDC industrial estate near Dahod was conducted by SOG sleuths after they received intelligence about the sale of spurious edible oil. The unit was raided and oil worth Rs 15.45 lakh was seized. 
The seizure included a large stock of suspected palm oil that was brought to the unit in a light commercial vehicle as well as stock stored at the unit. The vehicle was carrying 104 tins, weighing 1,505kg. 
The raiding party found stickers of 17 various different brands at the spot. Additionally, 456 pouches, 24 bottles, and 16 jerrycans of edible oil were found at the unit. Officials also found a 25,000-litre tank at the unit, containing about 10,000 litres of suspected palm oil. 
The value of items seized was estimated to be Rs 15.45 lakh. Food safety and other officials were informed of the find by police. Samples were taken for testing. One person, Murtua Zabuawala, was detained from the unit. 
Empty barrels of palm oil were also found at the site. The tins on the truck did not have any stickers. Police suspect palm oil or adulterated oil was being sold under the name of various cooking oil brands. cooking oil palm oil substitution mislabeling adulteration palm oil seizure detention suspected Dahod, Gujarat, India spurious cooking oil fflo:isSubstituteFor cooking oil suspected spurious cooking oil palm oil fflo:isSubstituteFor cooking oil Police suspect palm oil or adulterated oil was being sold under the name of various cooking oil brands. suspected palm oil fflo:foundAt Karedi GIDC industrial estate suspected palm oil that was brought to the unit Spurious Cooking Oil Labeling Method fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling found stickers of 17 various different brands at the spot suspected palm oil fflo:foundAt Processing seized of suspected spurious cooking oil from a unit AdulterationAct at Karedi GIDC unit prov:wasAssociatedWith Murtua Zabuawala One person, Murtua Zabuawala, was detained from the unit. Selling palm oil as branded cooking oil fflo:hasFraudType Substitution Police suspect palm oil or adulterated oil was being sold under the name of various cooking oil brands. Selling palm oil as branded cooking oil fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling Police suspect palm oil or adulterated oil was being sold under the name of various cooking oil brands. cooking oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod Selling palm oil as branded cooking oil Police suspect palm oil or adulterated oil was being sold under the name of various cooking oil brands.4c:T89d,Investigation into Dropsy Deaths in Nabha: New Committee Formed to Probe Tainted Edible Oil | Chandigarh News - Times of India indiatimes.com Patiala: The Patiala deputy commissioner has constituted a five-member committee under Nabha SDM officer to scrutinise and take forward an earlier investigation by health officials into three dropsy deaths which took place in Nabha in Sep this year.
Chief minister field officer Navdeep Singh informed that the team under Nabha SDM Nabha also comprises Nabha DSP, district epidemiologist, Patiala civil surgeon, Nabha senior medical officer and deputy registrar of co-operative societies.
Three members of a family had died after consumption of unfit edible oil in Sept, after which the health department had issued an advisory and conducted a probe.
Navdeep Singh said the committee will now act after going through the health departmentâs investigation report. The new committee has been asked to send its inquiry report to the CMâs field officer within seven days.
During the probe, they found the affected family sourced mustard seeds from three places. They said adulteration was confirmed in oil samples tested in a lab. The affected family had extracted oil from raw seeds given to them by a religious devotee. Two women, aged 26 and 36, died in private hospitals, while a 72-year-old man passed away at home. 
The issue came to light when another family member, a 50-year-old woman, was admitted to PGI hospital in late Sept. tnn edible oil mustard oil adulteration substandard unfit edible oil advisory committee formation lab_confirmed Nabha, Patiala, Punjab, India advisory fflo:issuedBy health department health department had issued an advisory dropsy deaths in Nabha fflo:inRegion Nabha dropsy deaths which took place in Nabha unfit edible oil fflo:causesEffect dropsy dropsy deaths which took place dropsy fflo:hasEffectType fflo:AcuteEffect Three members of a family had died adulteration finding in mustard oil fflo:confirmedBy lab test result adulteration was confirmed in oil samples tested in a lab mustard oil fflo:outputOf oil extraction extracted oil from raw seeds mustard oil fkg:hasIngredient mustard seeds extracted oil from raw seeds4d:Tee6,Gautam Budh Nagar: 370 kg sweets, 750 ltr oil seized in food safety checks hindustantimes.com Gautam Budh Nagar: 370 kg sweets, 750 ltr oil seized in food safety checks
Multiple teams of the Gautam Budh Nagar Food Safety and Drug Administration are conducting raids and collecting samples to ensure good quality of sweets
NOIDA: Ahead of Diwali festival on Thursday, the Food Safety and Drug Administration officials of Gautam Budh Nagar district have seized at least 370 kg of sweets and 750 litres oil that was found “unfit” for consumption during inspections carried out in parts of Noida and Greater Noida in the last two days alone, officials said on Monday.
Multiple teams of the Gautam Budh Nagar Food Safety and Drug Administration (FSDA) are conducting raids and collecting samples to ensure good quality of sweets, dairy products, and other edible items are available in the market during the festive season.
“Our goal is to ensure that residents have access to pure and safe food during the festive season. Through rigorous inspections and sampling, we aim to uphold food quality standards. Any violations found will lead to strict action to protect public health,” said Sarvesh Mishra, assistant commissioner food (II), Gautam Budh Nagar.
“A total of 14 samples that have been collected over the two days have been sent to laboratories for analysis. Further action will be taken based on the test results. The FSDA assures that similar inspections will continue in the days leading up to Diwali,” the officer added.
The inspection drives have been ramped up following directions of Manish Kumar Verma, the district magistrate, to ensure safe and unadulterated food for residents during the days-long festive season.
In one such raid at Kasna, Greater Noida, a sample of kalakand (sweet) was collected from a facility, and a sample of cottage cheese was obtained from another dairy. The team also seized around 125 kg of contaminated rasgullas from another production facility in Bilaspur and disposed of them.
To be sure, the FSDA takes actions under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006, which can include legal proceedings, fines up to ₹5 lakh for minor offenses, and higher in severe cases. Adulterated items are seized, and the responsible party’s business license may be suspended or cancelled.
In serious cases, particularly where public health is at high risk, imprisonment may be enforced. FSDA also issues public notifications for consumer safety and conducts regular inspections to ensure food quality standards are upheld.
- Senior Correspondent, Hindustan Times. Reports on district administration, health, civic issues, and environmental concerns in Noida and Greater Noida. Graduated from MJP Rohilkhand University in 2015 and started career in journalism in 2016, at The Times of India, UP West (Bareilly, Rampur, Moradabad and Sambhal) where reported on a range of issues including crime and politics till November 2021. Working with Hindustan Times since June, 2023.Read More edible oil substandard unsafe_food seizure suspected Noida, Gautam Budh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, India seizure of 370 kg sweets and 750 litres oil fflo:issuedBy Gautam Budh Nagar Food Safety and Drug Administration Food Safety and Drug Administration officials of Gautam Budh Nagar district have seized at least 370 kg of sweets and 750 litres oil seizure of 370 kg sweets and 750 litres oil fflo:inRegion Gautam Budh Nagar inspections carried out in parts of Noida and Greater Noida sample of kalakand fflo:collectedAt Production sample of kalakand (sweet) was collected from a facility seizure of contaminated rasgullas fflo:foundAtStep Production seized around 125 kg of contaminated rasgullas from another production facility rasgullas fflo:hasAdulterant contaminant contaminated rasgullas4e:Ta30,Health Crisis in Nabha: Urgent Advisory After Fatal Dropsy Cases indiatimes.com Patiala: After the death of three members of a family in 
Nabha from dropsy in Sept likely due to the consumption of adulterated edible oil, the health department has issued an advisory to officials, including senior medial officers (SMOs), on timely reporting of notifiable diseases.
“No new instances of symptoms related to dropsy have been found in the district. The affected family had sourced mustard seeds from three places, and investigations are ongoing to trace their origin. It remains unclear whether the adulteration occurred at the seed level or during oil extraction process, and appropriate action will be taken once the probe concludes,” said Patiala epidemiologist Dr Sumit. Samples from the oil mill have been collected and sent for analysis.
Sumit said directions have been issued by the civil surgeon to all private hospitals to immediately report any indications of symptoms related to dropsy.
Patiala civil surgeon had notified the DC and the deputy registrar of co-operative societies that samples of mustard seeds and oil were being gathered from various sites across the district. The family had extracted the oil from raw seeds given to them by a person. Two women, aged 26 and 36, died in private hospitals, while a 72-year-old man died at home. A 7-year-old girl was also hospitalised. The situation came to light when another family member, a 50-year-old woman, was admitted to PGI, Chandigarh, in late Sept. On Oct 8, PGI notified Patiala health department about a suspected food-borne outbreak, after examining symptoms and family history. Food safety officers investigated the family’s house in Nabha and found they had pressed mustard oil in Aug from a local oil mill using their own mustard seeds. Oil tested positive for argemone. mustard oil adulteration argemone advisory suspected Nabha, Patiala, Punjab, India analysis fso:isPerformedOn Samples from the oil mill Samples from the oil mill have been collected and sent for analysis advisory fflo:issuedBy health department the health department has issued an advisory to officials mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant argemone Oil tested positive for argemone. mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant argemone Oil tested positive for argemone mustard oil fkg:hasIngredient mustard seeds extracted the oil from raw seeds samples of mustard seeds and oil fflo:collectedAt various sites across the district samples of mustard seeds and oil were being gathered from various sites argemone fflo:detectedBy LaboratoryTest Oil tested positive for argemone.4f:Tdda,Adulterated mustard oil behind 3 dropsy deaths in Nabha: report hindustantimes.com Adulterated mustard oil behind 3 dropsy deaths in Nabha: report
Three members of the family died in September, with two women aged 26 and 32, succumbing at private hospitals, while a 72-year-old man died at his residence. A 7-year-old girl is undergoing treatment in Patiala.
The Kharar-based state food lab report has confirmed that mustard oil adulterated with the poisonous argemone mexicana seeds led to the deaths of three members of a family due to dropsy in Nabha last month.
“The lab report has confirmed the Nabha family used mustard oil adulterated with argemone mexicana seed. We have already surveyed the area where the family fell ill, and no other individual was found suffering from dropsy,” said Patiala civil surgeon Dr Jatinder Kansal.
Three members of the family died in September, with two women aged 26 and 32, succumbing at private hospitals, while a 72-year-old man died at his residence. A 7-year-old girl is undergoing treatment in Patiala.
The matter came to light when a 52-year-old woman, who is a family member of the three deceased, was admitted to PGIMER-Chandigarh. The doctors at PGI, while taking the medical history of the admitted woman, diagnosed the symptoms as that of dropsy. The PGI doctors alerted the Patiala health department, which collected the samples and sent them for testing.
Dropsy is a clinical state resulting from the use of edible oils adulterated with Argemone mexicana seed oil. The most common symptoms include bilateral pitting edema, erythema, localised tenderness, and cardiac and respiratory issues.
Meanwhile, Dr Divjot Singh of Patiala health department said that a religious devotee had reportedly donated the mustard seeds to the family in August.
After a few days, the family got the oil extracted and as soon as the family started consuming adulterated mustard oil, the members started falling sick, he added.
“Two women of the family died at private hospitals in Patiala while the third member, who was a 72-year-old male, died at their home,” Dr Divjot said.
- Karam Prakash is a Patiala-based senior correspondent covering several districts of Malwa region of Punjab. He writes on various domains, including health, agriculture, power and education. mustard oil adulteration contamination argemone mexicana seeds survey lab_confirmed Nabha, Patiala, Punjab, India mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant argemone mexicana seeds mustard oil adulterated with the poisonous argemone mexicana seeds confirmation of argemone mexicana in mustard oil fflo:identifies argemone mexicana seeds lab report has confirmed the Nabha family used mustard oil adulterated with argemone mexicana seed confirmation of argemone mexicana in mustard oil fflo:foundIn mustard oil lab report has confirmed the Nabha family used mustard oil adulterated with argemone mexicana seed confirmation of argemone mexicana in mustard oil fflo:inRegion Nabha The lab report has confirmed the Nabha family used mustard oil adulterated with argemone mexicana seed. Argemone mexicana seed oil fflo:causesEffect Dropsy Dropsy is a clinical state resulting from the use of edible oils adulterated with Argemone mexicana seed oil. argemone mexicana seeds fflo:causesEffect dropsy mustard oil adulterated with the poisonous argemone mexicana seeds led to the deaths Dropsy fflo:hasEffectType fflo:AcuteEffect The most common symptoms include bilateral pitting edema, erythema, localised tenderness, and cardiac and respiratory issues.50:T803,‘3 Dropsy deaths’: Patiala health officials launch probe hindustantimes.com ‘3 Dropsy deaths’: Patiala health officials launch probe
The probe was launched after a 52-year-old woman, a relative of the deceased, was admitted to PGIMER, Chandigarh. The medical history review of the patient suggested that she was suffering from dropsy.
Health officials in Patiala launched a probe after three members of a family, including two women, died in Nabha town due to ‘epidemic dropsy’.
Epidemic dropsy is a clinical state resulting from the use of edible oils adulterated with Argemone mexicana seed oil. The most common symptoms of epidemic dropsy include bilateral pitting edema, erythema, localised tenderness, and cardiac and respiratory issues. Two of the three deaths took place at private hospitals, while the 70-year-old man succumbed at his residence on September 30.
The probe was launched after a 52-year-old woman, a relative of the deceased, was admitted to PGIMER, Chandigarh. The medical history review of the patient suggested that she was suffering from dropsy. Patiala civil surgeon Dr Jatinder Kansal confirmed that health teams had been dispatched, and samples of the mustard oil consumed by the family had been sent to a laboratory for tests. “Efforts are underway to identify the source of the mustard seeds,” said Dr Sumeet Singh of the Patiala health department, adding, “Once the supplier is identified, we will investigate if adulterated mustard oil has been distributed elsewhere.” mustard oil adulteration contamination Argemone mexicana seed oil probe suspected Nabha, Patiala, Punjab, India Argemone mexicana seed oil fflo:causesEffect epidemic dropsy Epidemic dropsy is a clinical state resulting from the use of edible oils adulterated with Argemone mexicana seed oil. mustard oil fflo:belongsToCategory Oils samples of the mustard oil consumed by the family mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant Argemone mexicana seed oil samples of the mustard oil consumed by the family had been sent to a laboratory for tests51:Tad8,Inspection Conducted at Burger King Outlet in Malakpet, deccanchronicle.com Advertisement  
Hyderabad: The Commissioner of Food Safety conducted inspection at a Burger King outlet at Malakpet in Hyderabad and found issues related to cooking oil.
The palm oil used for frying non-vegetarian items were found with Total Polar Compound (TPC) value beyond the permissible limit. The TPC value found in the cooking oil was 27.0 which is beyond the permissible limit of 25.0.
According to the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), oil should not have more than 25% TPC and having more than 25% of TPC is not safe for human consumption.
For this reason, 15 litres of cooking oil was seized by the Commissioner of Food Safety.
FSSAI license copy, Medical fitness, Pest control records and Water analysis reports of the outlet were found valid.
( Source : Deccan Chronicle )
Next Story palm oil substandard contamination Total Polar Compound Seizure of 15 litres of cooking oil unclear Hyderabad, Malakpet, Telangana, India palm oil fflo:hasAdulterant Total Polar Compound palm oil used for frying non-vegetarian items were found with Total Polar Compound (TPC) value beyond the permissible limit TPC Limit 25.0 fflo:hasValue 25.0 permissible limit of 25.0 TPC value beyond permissible limit in cooking oil fflo:triggeredAction Seizure of 15 litres of cooking oil The palm oil used for frying non-vegetarian items were found with Total Polar Compound (TPC) value beyond the permissible limit. The TPC value found in the cooking oil was 27.0 which is beyond the permissible limit of 25.0. According to the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), oil should not have more than 25% TPC and having more than 25% of TPC is not safe for human consumption. For this reason, 15 litres of cooking oil was seized by the Commissioner of Food Safety. Seizure of 15 litres of cooking oil fflo:targets palm oil The palm oil used for frying non-vegetarian items were found with Total Polar Compound (TPC) value beyond the permissible limit. The TPC value found in the cooking oil was 27.0 which is beyond the permissible limit of 25.0. According to the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), oil should not have more than 25% TPC and having more than 25% of TPC is not safe for human consumption. For this reason, 15 litres of cooking oil was seized by the Commissioner of Food Safety. Total Polar Compound fflo:causesEffect unsafe for human consumption having more than 25% of TPC is not safe for human consumption TPC Limit 25.0 fflo:appliesTo Total Polar Compound permissible limit of 25.0 TPC Limit 25.0 fflo:inFood palm oil oil should not have more than 25% TPC TPC Limit 25.0 fflo:appliesTo Total Polar Compound oil should not have more than 25% TPC52:Ta8d,Poor quality oil found in kits distributed among tribes, fine of ₹7 lakh imposed on company thehindu.com The Idukki Subcollector has imposed a fine of ₹7 lakh on Star Foods, a private coconut oil brand, for distributing substandard coconut oil to tribal families in Idukki. The fine has been imposed on the company’s owner Shijas P.A., following an investigation by the Food Safety department in Thodupuzha.
The coconut oil brand named Kera Shathi was included in food kits distributed to tribal communities by the Scheduled Tribes Development department in June. Shortly afterwards, several cases of food poisoning were reported in the Velliyamattom panchayat tribal settlements near Thodupuzha. Upon receiving complaints, the food safety officer collected samples of the oil and sent them for chemical analysis.
Expired licence
During the investigation, it was revealed that the company’s Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) registration had expired on June 5, 2024. Furthermore, the FSSAI licence granted to Star Foods only permitted the sale of fish and fish products, making the production and sale of coconut oil a violation of the regulations.
In the hearing, Mr. Shijas admitted that the coconut oil was produced in Tamil Nadu and repackaged for sale, but the packets did not have an address, violating packaging norms. The Subcollector’s order emphasised that the sale of coconut oil with an expired licence and without proper labelling posed a serious threat to public health.
The order has mandated that the fine be paid within 15 days. If the payment is not made, the amount will be recovered through the revenue recovery process.
Published - September 05, 2024 07:32 pm IST coconut oil substandard mislabeling unsafe_food Fine of ₹7 lakh alleged Thodupuzha, Idukki, Kerala, India Food poisoning incident in Velliyamattom fflo:inRegion Velliyamattom panchayat cases of food poisoning were reported in the Velliyamattom panchayat Fine of ₹7 lakh on Star Foods fflo:issuedBy Idukki Subcollector The Idukki Subcollector has imposed a fine of ₹7 lakh on Star Foods Adulteration of coconut oil by Star Foods prov:used coconut oil distributing substandard coconut oil coconut oil repackaging act prov:wasAssociatedWith Mr. Shijas Mr. Shijas admitted that the coconut oil was produced in Tamil Nadu and repackaged coconut oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod repackaging without address packets did not have an address, violating packaging norms repackaging without address fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling packets did not have an address, violating packaging norms Subcollector's order fflo:targets coconut oil Subcollector's order emphasised that the sale of coconut oil53:T153a,FSSAI seizes 14000 litres of oil Kanpur festive season healthandme.com Credits: FSSAI and Canva
After Indore's Bhagirathpura food contamination and Horlicks adulteration in Odisha, another news of food adulteration comes from the state of Uttar Pradesh where UP Food Safety and Drug Administration or the UPFSDA with Food Safety and Standards Authority of India or FSSAI seized nearly 14,000 litres of adulterated oils during raids in Kanpur.
This has led to the confiscation of 1,000 kilograms of colored waste and other suspicious food items. This happened right ahead of the festive season like Holi, Eid and as Ramadan continues. This is also the time when festive meals are cooked in oil, ghee, and Ramadan fast is also broken with dates that too were found in rotten conditions.
Also Read: Scientists Develop First Antibodies To Block Epstein Barr Virus
As per the official statement, enforcement teams seized 13,972 litres of adulterated oil and 1,350 of colored waste during inspection across the city.
Officials were also able to spot fake ghee in the manufacturing unit of Kalyanpur. Fake ghee worth approximately Rs. 5.45 lakh were confiscated. The seized samples have been sent to a laboratory for further testing and analysis.
The raids were launched as a part of wider effort to curb food adulteration before the festive season when the demands for such edible also rise sharply.
Surprise inspections were also conducted at several food outlets, cold storage facilities and dairies across Kanpur that brought out a concerning image. These places have come under the scanner. Authorities inspected Swaroop Cold Storage in Aishbagh and Himalayan Cold Storage on Ayodhya Roads. Further raids were carried out on dairies in the Havetmau area and Rae Bareli Road. Samples from sweet shops and other eateiers have also been collected.
The raid collected rotten dates from the cold storage. Followings have been collected and recovered:
Officials confirmed that strict actions will be taken against them and this will continue throughout the festive period.
उत्तर प्रदेश में खाद्य सुरक्षा अभियान
— UPFSDA (@UPFSDA) February 26, 2026
होली से पहले बड़ी कार्रवाई खाद्य तेल इकाइयों पर विशेष प्रवर्तन कार्रवाई
खाद्य सुरक्षा एवं औषधि प्रशासन विभाग, उत्तर प्रदेश ने आमजनमानस को गुणवत्तापरक खाद्य तेल उपलब्ध कराने के उद्देश्य से एक बड़ा समन्वित निरीक्षण अभियान चलाया।
* 58… pic.twitter.com/uj3Ip5tpis
FSDA intensified raids and checks in Lucknow too during Ramadan and Holi. These inspections will be done in warehouses, food outlets, and dairy units to prevent sale of adulterated and substandard products. Raids from Hapur too have led to confiscation of adulterated food. UPFSDA plans to conduct further raids during the festive season. On X, formerly Twitter, the UPFSDA posted that it has seized 25,000 kg of Suji (valued at ₹10 Lakhs) from M/s Raj Sneh Agro Foods Pvt Ltd due to packaging regulation violations. Samples of Jaggery Powder, Gur, and Suji have been sent for lab testing.
Food adulteration happens when there is an intentional addition of foreign or inferior substance to original food products. A 2024 study published in SAGE Open Medicine notes various health impact of adulterated food which include:
The study also notes that adulteration could also lead to allergic reactions. Pregnant woman, children and elderly are more prone to getting any illness if adulterated food is consumed. edible oil adulteration seizure suspected Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India fake ghee fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee spot fake ghee in the manufacturing unit of Kalyanpur fake ghee fflo:foundAt manufacturing unit of Kalyanpur spot fake ghee in the manufacturing unit of Kalyanpur Rotten dates fflo:foundAt Cold storage The raid collected rotten dates from the cold storage Seizure of 25,000 kg of Suji fflo:issuedBy UPFSDA UPFSDA posted that it has seized 25,000 kg of Suji seizure of adulterated oils in Kanpur fflo:issuedBy UP Food Safety and Drug Administration UP Food Safety and Drug Administration or the UPFSDA with Food Safety and Standards Authority of India or FSSAI seized nearly 14,000 litres of adulterated oils seizure of adulterated oils in Kanpur fflo:issuedBy Food Safety and Standards Authority of India UP Food Safety and Drug Administration or the UPFSDA with Food Safety and Standards Authority of India or FSSAI seized nearly 14,000 litres of adulterated oils seizure of adulterated oils in Kanpur prov:used oil seized nearly 14,000 litres of adulterated oils Strict actions against violators fflo:issuedBy UPFSDA Officials confirmed that strict actions will be taken against them Lucknow raids fflo:issuedBy UPFSDA FSDA intensified raids and checks in Lucknow too Hapur raids fflo:issuedBy UPFSDA Raids from Hapur too have led to confiscation Seizure of Suji fflo:targets Suji seized 25,000 kg of Suji Seizure of Suji fflo:targets Suji seized 25,000 kg of Suji Adulterated food fflo:causesEffect Allergic reactions adulteration could also lead to allergic reactions54:T7da,FDA Raid on 21 Food Establishments in Kanpur indiatimes.com Kanpur: A team from Food Security and Drug Administration (FDA) department conducted a raid on Friday at M/s MA Enterprises in Dada Nagar, resulting in the seizure of the establishment due to the absence of a food license and the production of food items from expired raw materials under extremely unsanitary conditions.
Another team targeted M/s Tripathi Enterprises in Dada Nagar, collecting five samples of loose mustard oil.
They also confiscated 12 quintals of mustard oil, valued at Rs 67,200, on suspicion of adulteration.
FDA orchestrated a comprehensive raid on Friday, targeting approximately 21 food establishments. 
The operation culminated in the seizure of food items valued at Rs 1.56 lakhs and the collection of 34 food samples for further analysis.
According to Sanjay Pratap Singh, assistant commissioner (Food) - II of the FDA, a team raided the industrial site of M/s Universal Foods at Udyog Kunj, Panki, and confiscated 148 kgs of cumin worth Rs 74,000, 18 kgs of red chili powder worth Rs 2,520, 8 kgs of mixed spices worth Rs 1,120, and 156 kgs of garlic powder worth Rs 11,250.
Singh said the raids were conducted to ensure the sale of unadulterated food products during the Rakshabandhan festival, following the directives of the food commissioner and the DM. Additional teams collected as many as 34 food samples from 21 shops and seized edible items worth Rs 1.56 lakhs. The samples included milk and milk products, sweets, mawa, chili sauce, tomato sauce, gram powder, spices, and Boondi Ka Laddoo.
The collected samples will be sent to laboratories for examination, and the food establishments will face prosecution if the samples fail the lab testing, Singh added. mustard oil adulteration seizure sample_collection suspected Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India Raid on 21 Food Establishments fflo:issuedBy Food Security and Drug Administration team from Food Security and Drug Administration (FDA) department conducted a raid55:T61d,AMC seizes 180kg of âedible oilâ, seals 5 units indiatimes.com Ahmedabad: A team of the civic body’s health department seized 180 kilograms of edible oil of various brands and sealed five establishments selling substandard food items between July 14 and Saturday.
The health department has sealed five units including an oil godown in Sarkhej, City Point Restaurant in Gomtipur, Pooja Grih Udyog in Chandkheda, Jamalpur’s Haroon Fry Center, and Super Gold in Bapunagar. 
AMC teams inspected 1,164 establishments, issuing notices to 417 of them. A total of 993kg of inedible food and 807 litres of inedible liquid food were destroyed. 
During this period, 220 food samples were collected and sent to the food laboratory for testing. Four food samples were found to be substandard. These include a paneer sample from Shahibaug Dhokla Hub Snacks Restaurant, a tomato puree sample from Sindhu Bhavan SMSR Hospitality, a malai paneer sample from Maninagar Horizon Foods, and a chavanprash sample from Behrampura Shiv Shakti Chavana Mart. tnn edible oil substandard seizure sealing suspected Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India Seizure of 180kg edible oil fflo:issuedBy Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation AMC seizes 180kg of 'edible oil' Substandard edible oil finding fflo:foundAtStep Retail sealed five establishments selling substandard food items Paneer substandard finding fflo:foundIn paneer paneer sample from Shahibaug Dhokla Hub Snacks Restaurant Tomato puree substandard finding fflo:foundIn tomato puree tomato puree sample from Sindhu Bhavan SMSR Hospitality56:T56b,Raid Conducted on Fast Food Centers and Hotels for Using Adulterated Oils thehansindia.com In a surprise inspection carried out by the Municipal Commissioner and Food Safety Officers, several fast food centers and hotels under Badwel Municipality were found to be using adulterated oils and tasting salt, posing a serious threat to public health.  
The raids were conducted in response to information received by the authorities about the use of harmful ingredients in the food prepared at these establishments. Banned plastic covered spoons were also seized during the inspection.  
The Municipal Commissioner issued a warning to the fast food centers and hotels, cautioning them against using food colors or oils that could potentially harm the health of consumers. Strict action will be taken against any offenders found using such harmful ingredients.  
The authorities have urged the public to be cautious and to report any suspected cases of food adulteration or unsafe practices in eateries to ensure public health and safety. adulterated oils adulteration warning suspected Badwel, India warning to the fast food centers and hotels fflo:issuedBy Municipal Commissioner Municipal Commissioner issued a warning to the fast food centers and hotels adulterated oils fflo:causesEffect serious threat to public health using adulterated oils ... posing a serious threat to public health57:T69e,FSSAI issues notices to 55 edible oil manufacturers | Ahmedabad News - Times of India indiatimes.com Ahmedabad: FSSAI Gujarat issued notices to 55 edible oil manufacturers, restraining them from using old tins. These 55 include almost all refiners and re-packers. 
Sources said the Gujarat food and drug control administration (FDCA) and 
FSSAI have asked manufacturers to only use new tins for edible oils, but many are still reusing tins. 
FSSAI notice states, âIn the interest of food safety and to prevent potential hazards from metal contact with food, it has come to our attention that many food business operators (FBOs) involved in the manufacturing, re-labelling, repackaging, trading or any other food handling activities (specifically edible oil) continue to use old tin containers for packaging purposes.
As stipulated in the Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulation of 2018, tin containers once used, shall not be re-used for packaging of food.â H G Koshia, commissioner of the Gujarat FDCA, said, âAccording to the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India, the reuse of container tins for packaging food is prohibited.â edible oil contamination prohibited_additive reused tin containers Notice to 55 edible oil manufacturers suspected Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India Notice to 55 edible oil manufacturers fflo:issuedBy FSSAI Gujarat FSSAI Gujarat issued notices to 55 edible oil manufacturers Notice to 55 edible oil manufacturers fflo:targets edible oil notices to 55 edible oil manufacturers Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulation of 2018 fflo:defines Prohibition on reusing tin containers tin containers once used, shall not be re-used for packaging of food58:T9e4,From the pages of The Hindu, July 4, 1974: Edible oil adulterated with used motor oil thehindu.com New Delhi, July 3: An all-India sample survey conducted by Consumer Council of India has revealed that used motor oil is being utilised for adulteration with edible oils, hair oils etc, after being refined.
On the basis of this finding, the Consumer Council has written to the Ministry of Petroleum and Chemicals to take steps to check this practice which poses a serious health hazard.
The survey covered nearly 250 petrol stations where cars are also serviced. It was found that most of these service stations sold the used motor oil drained from cars during service, to the highest bidder who refined it at a hideout and sold it for adulteration with edible oils and hair oils of popular brands.
In Madras, 40 service stations were surveyed which were found to sell 2,500 litres of waste oil every day. In Bangalore, 15 service stations were surveyed which sold 1,000 litres per day. The largest daily sale of 4,000 litres of used oil was reported from Calcutta where 50 service stations were surveyed.
The Consumer Council, which has as its chairman the Union Deputy Minister for Labour, Mr. Balgovind Varma, has also referred to the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission about 100 cases where retail traders insist on consumers buying goods they do not need, as a condition for making available essential items to them.
The retailers are reported to have passed on the blame to manufacturers’ representatives and wholesale distributors who refuse to supply the retailer essential articles unless they buy non-salable items too.
Published - July 04, 2024 05:09 am IST edible oil adulteration used motor oil written to Ministry of Petroleum and Chemicals referred to Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission alleged India edible oil fflo:hasAdulterant used motor oil used motor oil is being utilised for adulteration with edible oils hair oil fflo:hasAdulterant used motor oil adulteration with edible oils, hair oils etc all-India sample survey fflo:identifies used motor oil An all-India sample survey... has revealed that used motor oil is being utilised used motor oil fflo:commonIn Madras In Madras, 40 service stations were surveyed which were found to sell 2,500 litres used motor oil fflo:commonIn Bangalore In Bangalore, 15 service stations were surveyed which sold 1,000 litres used motor oil fflo:commonIn Calcutta largest daily sale of 4,000 litres of used oil was reported from Calcutta59:T1a10,Fake Edible Oil Ingredients: 6 harmful ingredients found in fake edible oil | - Times of India indiatimes.com The global food industry has seen a worrying rise in the prevalence of counterfeit products, and edible oil is no exception. The use of fake edible oils, which often contain harmful ingredients, poses significant health risks. Recently, a disturbing incident underscored this threat when 18,000 litres of fake edible oil were seized in Ajmer, Rajasthan by the Food Safety and Standards Association of India (FSSAI) which highlights the ongoing threat posed by food adulteration. As per a recent tweet by FSSAI, âThe fake cooking oil was being prepared by using duplicated labels of various famous brands by misbranding these items, along with adulteration.â We bring you a list of some of the ingredients that are added to edible oils and can be extremely harmful to your health.
Mineral oilMineral oil, a byproduct of petroleum, is sometimes added to fake edible oils to increase volume and reduce costs. Although used in non-food products, its ingestion can cause serious health issues, including gastrointestinal problems, liver damage, and even cancer with prolonged exposure. The inclusion of mineral oil in edible products is a clear violation of food safety standards.
ALSO READ: 5 drinks that ICMR has suggested to consume and avoid during summersArgemone oilArgemone oil is another hazardous adulterant found in fake edible oil. Extracted from the seeds of the Argemone mexicana plant, this oil is toxic and can cause epidemic dropsy, a condition characterised by swelling, glaucoma, and even heart failure. Consuming argemone oil-contaminated products poses severe health risks, making its presence in food products extremely dangerous.
Cottonseed oilWhile cottonseed oil is used in the food industry, its unrefined form can be harmful due to the presence of gossypol, a naturally occurring toxin that can cause reproductive issues and liver damage. Unscrupulous producers might mix unrefined cottonseed oil with edible oils to cut costs, disregarding the potential health hazards associated with its consumption.
Castor oilCastor oil, primarily used for industrial and medicinal purposes, is sometimes added to fake edible oil mixtures. Ricinoleic acid, the main component of castor oil, can cause severe gastrointestinal issues if ingested in large quantities. The use of castor oil in food products is highly inappropriate and poses significant health risks to consumers.
ALSO READ: Popular eating joints in India that have violated food safety and sanitation normsCheap vegetable oilsCheap vegetable oils like palm oil or soybean oil are often mixed with higher-quality oils and sold as pure products. While not inherently toxic, the deceptive labelling and lower nutritional value of these oils undermine consumer trust and can lead to health issues associated with excessive consumption of certain fats. The nutritional quality and intended health benefits of pure oils are compromised in such adulterated products.
Artificial colouring and flavouring agentsTo mask the adulteration and make fake oils appear genuine, producers often add artificial colouring and flavouring agents. These chemicals can cause allergic reactions, digestive issues, and other health problems. Long-term exposure to certain artificial additives is linked to more severe conditions, including cancer and neurological disorders.
(Thumb Image courtesy: Canva) edible oil adulteration counterfeit mislabeling Argemone oil seizure alleged Ajmer, Rajasthan, India Fake edible oil seizure in Ajmer fflo:inRegion Ajmer, Rajasthan 18,000 litres of fake edible oil were seized in Ajmer, Rajasthan seizure of 18,000 litres of fake edible oil fflo:issuedBy Food Safety and Standards Association of India 18,000 litres of fake edible oil were seized in Ajmer, Rajasthan by the Food Safety and Standards Association of India gossypol fflo:causesEffect reproductive issues gossypol, a naturally occurring toxin that can cause reproductive issues Castor oil fflo:causesEffect severe gastrointestinal issues Ricinoleic acid, the main component of castor oil, can cause severe gastrointestinal issues Ricinoleic acid fflo:causesEffect severe gastrointestinal issues Ricinoleic acid, the main component of castor oil, can cause severe gastrointestinal issues edible oil fflo:hasAdulterant Argemone oil Argemone oil is another hazardous adulterant found in fake edible oil mineral oil fflo:causesEffect gastrointestinal problems ingestion can cause serious health issues, including gastrointestinal problems mineral oil fflo:causesEffect liver damage ingestion can cause serious health issues, including gastrointestinal problems, liver damage mineral oil fflo:causesEffect cancer even cancer with prolonged exposure misbranding fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling using duplicated labels of various famous brands by misbranding mineral oil fflo:hasDefinition a byproduct of petroleum Mineral oil, a byproduct of petroleum Argemone oil fflo:causesEffect epidemic dropsy this oil is toxic and can cause epidemic dropsy Argemone oil fflo:causesEffect glaucoma characterised by swelling, glaucoma, and even heart failure Argemone oil fflo:causesEffect heart failure characterised by swelling, glaucoma, and even heart failure gossypol fflo:causesEffect liver damage toxin that can cause reproductive issues and liver damage cottonseed oil fkg:hasIngredient gossypol unrefined form can be harmful due to the presence of gossypol artificial colouring fflo:causesEffect allergic reactions These chemicals can cause allergic reactions artificial colouring and flavouring agents fflo:causesEffect digestive issues These chemicals can cause allergic reactions, digestive issues artificial flavouring fflo:causesEffect allergic reactions These chemicals can cause allergic reactions artificial flavouring agents fflo:causesEffect digestive issues These chemicals can cause allergic reactions, digestive issues artificial colouring fflo:causesEffect cancer Long-term exposure to certain artificial additives is linked to more severe conditions, including cancer artificial flavouring fflo:causesEffect cancer Long-term exposure to certain artificial additives is linked to more severe conditions, including cancer artificial colouring fflo:causesEffect neurological disorders Long-term exposure to certain artificial additives is linked to more severe conditions, including cancer and neurological disorders artificial flavouring fflo:causesEffect neurological disorders Long-term exposure to certain artificial additives is linked to more severe conditions, including cancer and neurological disorders5a:Td58,Health News: Warning signs of diabetes seen in morning, how to identify fake cooking oil, laptop related health issues, common signs of vitamin A deficiency, and more | - The Times of India indiatimes.com Read today's health news briefing here. Your morning dose of health updates, news and latest guidelines are all here:
News18,000 fake cooking oil seized, how to identify such oils: Nearly 18,000 litres of fake cooking oil was seized in Ajmer. Here arises an important question, what is fake cooking oil? 
How to identify whether the cooking oil that we purchase from the market is fake or genuine?Consuming alcohol on flights can lower oxygen level in blood:For those who enjoy drinking alcohol on flights, a new study has made some shocking revelations. A new study published online in the respiratory journal Thorax, 
drinking and napping on long haul flights may not be good for the heart, even among the young and healthy as it can lower the amount of oxygen in the blood (SpO2) and increase the heart rate for a protracted period.
Diet can help reduce premature deaths in women:Women consuming the largely plant-based 
Mediterranean diet were found to be at a 23 per cent lower risk of dying prematurely, the study found. The findings were published in The Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA).
Health tipsEarly signs of diabetes seen in morning: Diabetes, a chronic condition characterized by elevated blood glucose levels, can manifest various symptoms at different times of the day. Notably, 
some warning signs are particularly evident during the morning hours. Understanding these symptoms can help in early detection and management of the condition.
Do you place your laptop on your lap? Read this:Laptops have seamlessly integrated into our daily routines, offering portability and convenience that is hard to resist. However, despite their name and widespread use, 
placing a laptop on your lap isn't advisable. This habit can significantly impact male reproductive health due to elevated scrotal temperature and potential exposure to electromagnetic radiation. Therefore, it's essential to be mindful of how and where we use laptops to safeguard our well-being.
How sugar isn't the only cause of diabetes: Diabetes is a complex and multifactorial disease that affects millions of people globally. 
While the consumption of sugar is often highlighted as the primary cause of diabetes this perspective just oversimplifies the main issue. Diabetes, particularly type-2 diabetes is influenced by a number of factors like genetics, lifestyle choices, and environmental factors.
Common signs of vitamin A deficiency:Vitamin A is a crucial nutrient vital for maintaining optimal vision, a robust immune system, and the proper functioning of essential organs like the heart, lungs, and kidneys. Unfortunately, despite its significance, numerous individuals, particularly in developing nations, experience a deficiency in this essential vitamin. Such a deficit can give rise to various health issues. Here, 
we highlight six prevalent indicators of vitamin A deficiency and recommend the finest natural sources to help you meet your body's requirements for this vital nutrient. cooking oil counterfeit adulteration fake cooking oil seizure suspected Ajmer, Rajasthan, India Seizure of fake cooking oil in Ajmer fflo:inRegion Ajmer Nearly 18,000 litres of fake cooking oil was seized in Ajmer.5b:T1a7d,How to identify fake cooking oil? (FSSAI recommended tips) - Times of India indiatimes.com Nearly 18,000 litres of fake cooking oil was seized by the medical department in Ajmer, the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (
FSSAI) has tweeted. "About 18 thousand liters of misbranded edible oil was seized on Thursday #Ajmer by the medical department in a campaign against #à¤®à¤¿à¤²à¤¾à¤µà¤ . Here, edible oil was being prepared by using duplicates and different labels of various famous brands and by misbranding and adulteration," the Medical & Health Department, Rajasthan has tweeted on X (formerly Twitter).
In the past, the apex food regulator of the country has seized such adulterated cooking oil manufacturers. Here arises an important question, what is fake cooking oil? How to identify whether the cooking oil that we purchase from the market is fake or genuine?
Identifying fake cooking oil is crucial for both health and economic reasons. Fake or adulterated cooking oils can contain harmful substances and may lack the nutritional benefits of genuine oils. Fake cooking oil refers to oils that are adulterated or not pure. For example, expensive oils like olive oil might be mixed with cheaper ones like soybean or palm oil, industrial oils may be repurposed for cooking and harmful chemicals might be added to alter the appearance or taste.
Hereâs how you can identify fake cooking oils
Genuine oils usually list a single type of oil. 
Multiple oils in the ingredient list may indicate blending. Look for the expected nutritional profile of the oil. Check for certifications like organic, non-GMO, or specific country standards. Make sure the oil is within its expiry date, as expired oil can indicate poor quality.
If the price of the oil is significantly lower than the average market price, it could be an indication of adulteration.
Ensure the bottle is sealed properly. Broken seals or loose caps can indicate tampering. Purchase oils from reputable brands that have established quality standards.
Genuine oils have specific color and clarity. For example, olive oil is usually golden-green, while sunflower oil is pale yellow. Any unusual color or cloudiness can be a red flag.
Genuine oils have characteristic smells. Olive oil, for instance, should have a fresh, fruity aroma. An off or rancid smell indicates spoilage or adulteration.
Poll: What is the first thing you did in the morning immediately after waking up?Taste a small amount of the oil. It should have a clean, natural taste. Any bitterness or odd flavors could indicate contamination.
To use cooking oil for health, opt for oils with beneficial fats like olive, avocado, or coconut oil. These oils contain monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fats that support heart health. Use extra virgin olive oil for salad dressings and low-heat cooking to preserve its nutrients. For high-heat cooking, choose oils with high smoke points, such as avocado or coconut oil, to avoid harmful compounds. Limit the use of oils high in saturated fats, like palm or vegetable oil. Balance oil consumption with a diet rich in fruits, vegetables, lean proteins, and whole grains to maintain overall health.
Simple home tests to check oil quality
- Place a small amount of oil in a clear container and refrigerate it. Pure oils will solidify, while adulterated oils may remain liquid.
- Put the oil in the freezer. Pure olive oil, for example, should start to solidify within 30 minutes.
- Drop a small amount of oil on a white paper and let it dry. Pure oil will leave an even, translucent spot without a greasy ring.
- Take cooking oil in a test tube and add 4 ml of distilled water to it. Shake the test tube for a few seconds. Now take 2 ml of this liquid in another test tube and add 2 ml of concentrated HCL to this. There will be no color change if the oil is unadulterated, however if the oil is adulterated a red color will be seen on the top most layer of the oil.
- To check the purity of coconut oil, take some oil in a container, and keep it in the refrigerator with a temperature between 5-10 degrees. Wait for 60-90 minutes. Pure coconut oil will solidify, however, adulterated oils will have a separate layer on the top due to separate freezing points of the oils. cooking oil mislabeling adulteration seizure suspected Ajmer, Rajasthan, India cooking oil fflo:hasAdulterant industrial oils industrial oils may be repurposed for cooking cooking oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod misbranding Here, edible oil was being prepared by using duplicates and different labels of various famous brands and by misbranding and adulteration olive oil fflo:belongsToCategory Oils opt for oils with beneficial fats like olive cooking oil fflo:hasAdulterant soybean oil olive oil might be mixed with cheaper ones like soybean cooking oil fflo:hasAdulterant harmful chemicals harmful chemicals might be added to alter the appearance misbranding fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling using duplicates and different labels of various famous brands cooking oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod substitution expensive oils like olive oil might be mixed with cheaper ones substitution fflo:hasFraudType Substitution expensive oils like olive oil might be mixed with cheaper ones cooking oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod addition of chemicals harmful chemicals might be added to alter the appearance addition of chemicals fflo:hasFraudType Masking harmful chemicals might be added to alter the appearance or taste cooking oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod multiple oils in ingredient list Multiple oils in the ingredient list may indicate blending Refrigeration Test fflo:producesIndicator Solidification of pure oil Pure oils will solidify, while adulterated oils may remain liquid Freezer Test fflo:producesIndicator Solidification within 30 minutes Pure olive oil, for example, should start to solidify within 30 minutes Paper Spot Test fflo:producesIndicator Even translucent spot without greasy ring Pure oil will leave an even, translucent spot without a greasy ring HCL Color Test fflo:producesIndicator Red color change if the oil is adulterated a red color will be seen HCL Color Test fflo:producesIndicator No color change There will be no color change if the oil is unadulterated refrigeration solidification test fflo:producesIndicator separate layer on the top adulterated oils will have a separate layer on the top refrigeration solidification test fflo:producesIndicator solidification of pure coconut oil Pure coconut oil will solidify refrigeration solidification test fflo:producesIndicator separate layer on top adulterated oils will have a separate layer on the top refrigerator test for coconut oil fflo:producesIndicator separate layer on top adulterated oils will have a separate layer on the top5c:T98f,Over 12,000 litre of âspuriousâ oil seized | Jaipur News - Times of India indiatimes.com Jaipur: Food Safety and Drug Control Commissionerate teams on Tuesday seized 6,683 litre of edible oil in Muhana Mandi and 6,000 litre at a factory in Niwai on suspicion of substandard quality.
Health department officials said they had received information about substandard mustard oil of Ranthambore brand coming from Niwai in Tonk district to Muhana Anaj Mandi in Jaipur.
Upon surveillance, the goods were found being unloaded at Muhana Mandi. Samples of the oil were taken under the Food Safety Act 2006, and 6,683 litre seized due to suspicion of substandard quality.
Officials said samples of this edible oil had been taken a few days earlier and were found to be of substandard quality. 
Tonk chief medical health officer (CMHO) Ashok Yadav was informed about the action. Subsequently, the CMHO of Tonk reached the factory in Niwai Industrial Area and seized approximately 6,000 litre of Ranthambore brand Kacchi Ghani oil. Food safety officer Suresh Kumar was present during the action.
In another case, inspection was done at Vinayak Bakers at Hawa Sadak, Jaipur. Food safety officers found expired materials at the bakery, which were seized. Action is now being taken to suspend its food licence. Ranthambore brand mustard oil substandard seizure suspected Jaipur, Rajasthan, India Ranthambore brand mustard oil fflo:belongsToCategory Oils substandard mustard oil of Ranthambore brand seizure of 6,683 litre of edible oil fflo:issuedBy Food Safety and Drug Control Commissionerate Food Safety and Drug Control Commissionerate teams on Tuesday seized 6,683 litre of edible oil Ranthambore brand mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant substandard quality substandard mustard oil of Ranthambore brand seizure of 6,000 litre of Ranthambore brand Kacchi Ghani oil fflo:issuedBy Food Safety and Drug Control Commissionerate CMHO of Tonk reached the factory in Niwai Industrial Area and seized approximately 6,000 litre Vinayak Bakers fflo:foundAtStep Hawa Sadak, Jaipur inspection was done at Vinayak Bakers at Hawa Sadak, Jaipur finding of expired materials fflo:triggeredAction suspension of food licence Food safety officers found expired materials at the bakery, which were seized. Action is now being taken to suspend its food licence Food Safety Act 2006 fflo:appliesToFood mustard oil Samples of the oil were taken under the Food Safety Act 20065d:Tbca,2 fall ill after consuming McDonald’s cheese and Theobroma cake indiatimes.com NOIDA: Teams of food safety and drug administration collected samples of palm oil, cheese and mayonnaise from a McDonald’s outlet in Sector 18 and pineapple cake from Theobroma in Sector 104 following complaints from customers that they fell ill after having food from these eateries.
Officials said the samples had been sent to Lucknow and the reports would be available only after a month.
If the products are found to be substandard, action would be taken against the companies. 
“A couple of weeks ago, we received two complaints regarding the quality of food on the FSSAI (Food Safety and Standards Authority of India) portal. A person from Noida, who had ordered a burger online from a McDonald’s outlet in Sector 18, alleged that the food was stale. Our team visited the restaurant and collected samples of palm oil, cheese and mayonnaise – all of which are used to make a burger. These were sent for testing to a state govt lab in Lucknow,” said Archana Dheeran, assistant commissioner (food) II in Noida.
The same day, Dheeran said, a customer lodged a complaint about a pineapple cake she had had from a Theobroma outlet in Sector 104. The customer — a woman — lodged a written complaint on the FSSAI portal and dialled the toll-free number too.
“The woman alleged her health condition deteriorated after having the cake she had ordered from the bakery. We visited the outlet and took a sample of pineapple cake for testing. In both cases, the reports will be available in a month,” the senior official added.
Calls and messages to the two outlets did not elicit any response. 
What if the samples are found to be substandard?
“According to procedure, the company that made the product would be sent a notice and asked to explain why their food failed the 
quality test. If the eatery is not happy with the test result, it can appeal for further testing of the sample at a central govt lab. But if the samples are found to be of poor quality again, the company would be slapped with a hefty penalty,” said Nitin Madan, additional district magistrate.
Complaints about food quality and adulteration are increasingly being lodged on the FSSAI portal, officials agreed. palm oil substandard contamination suspected Noida, Gautam Buddha Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, India burger fkg:hasIngredient palm oil palm oil, cheese and mayonnaise – all of which are used to make a burger burger fkg:hasIngredient cheese cheese and mayonnaise – all of which are used to make a burger burger fkg:hasIngredient mayonnaise mayonnaise – all of which are used to make a burger IncidentFinding_pineapple_cake prov:wasAttributedTo Theobroma complaint about a pineapple cake she had had from a Theobroma outlet HealthEffect_deterioration fflo:hasEffectType AcuteEffect health condition deteriorated after having the cake IncidentFinding_pineapple_cake fflo:supportedBy FSSAI Portal lodged a written complaint on the FSSAI portal5e:T9e4,DCA raids clinics, seizes fake organic oils with false claims thehansindia.com Hyderabad: Telangana State Drugs Control Administration (DCA) seized 'aio organic almond oil, walnut oil, and kalonji oil' from a clinic in Shalibanda for promoting misleading health benefits claims. The raid targeted the manufacturing site of these products, which were found to bear false claims. The officers seized stocks worth Rs 21,000.
In a separate incident, DCA, in collaboration with Vigilance and Enforcement officials on March 2, raided a quack’s clinic in Irikigudem village, Damarcherla mandal, Nalgonda district, and confiscated drugs intended for sale. Dasari Mallaiah, a quack from Nalgonda district, claimed to be a ‘Rural Medical Practitioner’ but was practicing medicine without proper qualifications.  
The Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Act 1954 prohibits misleading advertisements claiming treatment for serious ailments like cancer, heart disease, diabetes, and obesity.  
Further investigations will be conducted, and legal action will be taken against offenders under the Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Act 1954 for misleading advertising about disease treatments.  
The raid uncovered a large stash of medicines, including antibiotics, steroids, analgesics, cough syrups, and others, worth Rs 45,000, stored without any drug license. The officials also seized higher-generation ‘antibiotic injections’, highlighting the grave public health risks associated with the indiscriminate sale of antibiotics by unqualified individuals. Samples were gathered for analysis, and further investigations are being conducted to pursue legal action against the offenders.  
Wholesalers and dealers who deliver drugs to unqualified individuals while operating without a drug licence are also subject to the Drugs and Cosmetics Act and will face harsh penalties. Wholesalers and dealers must ensure that receivers have legitimate drug licences before delivering medicines to them. The DCA enforces the Drugs and Cosmetics Act by issuing drug licences and conducting surprise checks on unqualified individuals involved in drug sales. The public can report any illegal activities related to medicines to the DCA via the toll-free number 1800-599-6969, available from 10:30 am to 5 pm. almond oil walnut oil kalonji oil mislabeling counterfeit seizure suspected Hyderabad, Telangana, India Mislabeling of organic status fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling fake organic oils with false claims5f:T887,MP: Spice Grinding Unit Sealed For Flouting Norms freepressjournal.in Amjhera (Madhya Pradesh): In a recent crackdown against adulteration, the food safety team in Dhar district sealed a spice grinding factory operating without a licence in Amjhera. Following the directives of Collector Priyank Mishra, the officials raided the factory operating under the name of KFC Traders at Old Bus Stand Road. During the inspection, it was found that the factory, believed to be owned by Abdul Qadir, was engaged in the manufacturing of chilli powder and coriander powder.
Moreover, 32 packs of Indore-manufactured Heera A One turmeric powder lacking essential labelling information such as batch number, manufacturing date and expiry date were found. Food safety officer Sachin Logaria said samples of chilli powder, Mahi brand refined soybean oil and Heera A One turmeric powder were collected for testing. Further investigation revealed that Qadir lacked the necessary licence under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006.
Consequently, three quintals of turmeric powder and 30 kg of chilli powder was confiscated. The seized materials, valued at Rs 29,987, will undergo testing at the State Food Testing Laboratory in Bhopal. The factory was sealed and further action will be taken under the relevant laws of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. soybean oil substandard mislabeling sealing confiscation suspected Amjhera, Dhar, Madhya Pradesh, India Heera A One turmeric powder fflo:hasAdulterationMethod Mislabeling lacking essential labelling information such as batch number, manufacturing date and expiry date Mahi brand refined soybean oil sample fflo:collectedAt Processing samples of chilli powder, Mahi brand refined soybean oil and Heera A One turmeric powder were collected Testing of seized materials fso:isPerformedAt State Food Testing Laboratory in Bhopal undergo testing at the State Food Testing Laboratory in Bhopal KFC Traders fflo:compliesWith Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 lacked the necessary licence under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 Sealing of spice grinding factory in Amjhera fflo:targets chilli powder 30 kg of chilli powder was confiscated60:Ta5e,MP: 200 Litres Adulterated Mustard Oil Found In Jabalpur Oil Factory During Surprise Inspection freepressjournal.in Jabalpur (Madhya Pradesh): A team of food inspectors sealed a Jabalpur based oil factory on Monday after discovering significant contamination and unsanitary conditions within the premises. A barrel containing 200 litres mustard oil failed to meet the quality standards.
The team of food department conducted a surprise inspection at the mustard oil factory 'Bhagwan Oil Mill', located in Ghamapur on Monday and found the production area to be alarmingly dirty. The food inspectors were stunned to see the unhygienic methods and dirty containers being used throughout the process of manufacturing oil.
Following the inspection, the Food Department took immediate action and sealed the factory.
Upon inspection, authorities also collected samples of the oil to investigate possible adulteration. The raid didn't stop at the factory; the team also discovered suspicious packaging of mustard oil from various other companies, indicating a potential wider issue within the industry.
Food safety officer Madhuri Mishra |
Madhuri Mishra, a food safety officer, said that during the inspection, they discovered 200 liters of oil that did not meet the quality standards and was subsequently sealed. Mishra also highlighted a concerning practice where the factory was found to be repackaging oil from other companies using their own packaging, which is a violation of the law. mustard oil substandard contamination mislabeling sealing suspected Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh, India AdulterationAct at Bhagwan Oil Mill prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhagwan Oil Mill surprise inspection at the mustard oil factory 'Bhagwan Oil Mill' AdulterationAct at Bhagwan Oil Mill prov:used mustard oil A barrel containing 200 litres mustard oil failed to meet the quality standards mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod repackaging oil from other companies factory was found to be repackaging oil from other companies Repackaging oil from other companies fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling repackaging oil from other companies using their own packaging mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod unhygienic methods and dirty containers unhygienic methods and dirty containers being used throughout the process of manufacturing oil Bhagwan Oil Mill fflo:foundAt mustard oil 200 litres mustard oil failed to meet the quality standards IncidentFinding at Bhagwan Oil Mill fflo:foundAtStep Processing inspection at the mustard oil factory IncidentFinding at Bhagwan Oil Mill fflo:triggeredAction Sealing of Bhagwan Oil Mill Food Department took immediate action and sealed the factory61:Te1a,Over 4 lakh litres seized in drive against substandard edible oil in UP theprint.in Lucknow, Feb 28 (PTI) The Uttar Pradesh Food Safety and Drug Administration (FSDA) has seized 4,16,494 litres of edible oil of suspect or substandard quality, estimated to be worth approximately Rs 6.43 crore.
FSDA has launched an inspection drive to ensure quality edible oil is available to the general public ahead of Holi and correction notices were issued to 37 manufacturing units due to deficiencies, the department said in a post on X.
The department said that 58 inter-district teams were formed and deployed on the field and 64 edible oil manufacturing units were inspected.
“Eight units were found closed during the inspection, while 56 units were found operational, against which enforcement action was taken,” the department said, and added that 206 samples of edible oil were collected for testing.
The department seized 4,16,494 litres of edible oil of suspect or substandard quality. The estimated value of the seized oil is approximately Rs 6.43 crore, the department said.
On February 25, the FSDA team seized and destroyed 9 quintals (900 kg) of contaminated khoya at Panki Railway Station in Kanpur. The khoya, brought by train, was found to be in extremely unhygienic conditions. The seized contaminated khoya was disposed of at the waste disposal plant in Govindnagar.
In Barabanki, the Food Safety Department destroyed 60 kg of khoya, 250 litres of milk, 60 kg of spices, 370 kg of kachri-papad, and 90 kg of chenna. Ten samples were sent for testing.
On February 22, in a major crackdown on food adulteration in Deoria district, FSDA team raided a mustard oil manufacturing unit. Suspected adulteration materials seized, including 400 litres of refined soybean oil found on the premises. Production was halted immediately, the department said on X.
In Lucknow, Ghaziabad, the FSDA raided an illegal tea leaf warehouse in Lucknow. The warehouse was operating without a valid license. The department seized approximately 8.5 quintals of adulterated tea leaves, the department said.
On February 23, the FSDA team took major action and seized a consignment of cheese in Ghaziabad district. About 1,200 kg of cheese worth Rs 3.84 lakh was destroyed on the spot. Three samples of cheese have been taken for testing.
On Thursday, police in Ghaziabad arrested two traders of Devendrapuri for selling counterfeit household brands. The traders identified as Sumit and Rakesh, were owner of a provision store, police said.
A complaint was filled by Lalit Kumar, an official representative of a company under Copyright Act. During raid 750 counterfeit packets of Tata salt along with 480 bottels harpic and 218 units of All Out mosquito repellants were recovered, police said, and added that the recovered items have been sealed.
“We are currently investigating the supply chain to determine where these duplicate goods are being produced,” ACP Modinagar Bhaskar Verma said. PTI NAV COR SKY SKY
This report is auto-generated from PTI news service. ThePrint holds no responsibility for its content. edible oil substandard seizure inspection correction notices suspected Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India seizure of 4,16,494 litres of edible oil fflo:issuedBy Uttar Pradesh Food Safety and Drug Administration The Uttar Pradesh Food Safety and Drug Administration (FSDA) has seized 4,16,494 litres of edible oil 206 samples of edible oil fflo:collectedAt edible oil manufacturing units 206 samples of edible oil were collected for testing FSDA seizure of cheese fflo:targets cheese seized a consignment of cheese62:Tade,‘Pressing’ issues: Coconut oil first in line for ‘Made in Kerala’ tag newindianexpress.com THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: It’s all about setting standards and dealing with ‘pressing’ issues. Coconut oil will be the first product to get the ‘Made in Kerala’ tag, as part of the state government’s Kerala Brand initiative to help local manufacturers garner more credibility and acceptability in the market, especially outside the state.
The Industries and Commerce Department recently released the criteria for coconut oil manufacturers to get included in the branding exercise. “The criteria were prepared after a survey of 1,000-odd manufacturers in the state. We also took note of the various registrations and certifications for oil units. Those with statutory registrations and certifications and that follow quality and ethical standards will be considered,” said a department official. “For instance, units where the workforce does not include women will not be considered,” he added.
The government is of the view that the ‘Made in Kerala’ tag will help manufacturers gain more standing. Besides the local sourcing of raw materials, units should possess FSSAI licences and valid UDYAM and GST registrations. They should be manufacturing “expressed raw grade-I coconut oil” and also possess either IS 542:2018 or AGMARK certification.
Selected units will be continuously monitored during the initial years. Units that violate the conditions, like losing statutory registration, will be removed from the programme and this would be made public.
The government accorded top priority to coconut oil given reports of unethical practices in the sector. The food safety department had found that adulterated oil was rampant in the market. Most were marketed under names similar to popular brands.
Units selected under the branding exercise can print the tagline and logo, common for all products, on their packaging. Other products to come under the branding exercise include selected categories of food products and leather footwear. The Kerala Brand certification will be initially awarded for two years or until the expiration of the required quality certifications, whichever comes first. It can be renewed. coconut oil adulteration adulterated oil suspected Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, India adulterated oil fflo:foundAt market adulterated oil was rampant in the market coconut oil fflo:compliesWith IS 542:2018 possess either IS 542:2018 or AGMARK certification coconut oil fflo:compliesWith AGMARK possess either IS 542:2018 or AGMARK certification coconut oil manufacturer fflo:compliesWith FSSAI licence units should possess FSSAI licences Kerala Brand certification fflo:appliesToFood coconut oil The government accorded top priority to coconut oil63:T645,Navi Mumbai: 7 booked for selling adulterated edible oil mid-day.com Navi Mumbai: 7 booked for selling adulterated edible oil
Seven people linked to an agro firm have been accused of selling adulterated edible oil. Navi Mumbai Police has filed an FIR against them.
Representative Image
The Navi Mumbai Police registered a First Information Report against seven persons for allegedly selling adulterated edible oil, stated a PTI report. The report added that the accused persons are associated with an agro firm.
According to the PTI report, a team of APMC police station raided the premises of Gautam Agro India at Vashi on September 5 and found that animal fats and other harmful substances were being mixed in palm oil which in turn was being sold as groundnut oil and safflower oil. palm oil groundnut oil safflower oil adulteration substitution animal fats harmful substances First Information Report alleged Navi Mumbai, Thane, Maharashtra, India palm oil fflo:hasAdulterant harmful substances harmful substances were being mixed in palm oil palm oil fflo:isSubstituteFor groundnut oil palm oil which in turn was being sold as groundnut oil selling adulterated edible oil prov:wasAssociatedWith Gautam Agro India accused of selling adulterated edible oil palm oil fflo:hasAdulterant animal fats animal fats ... were being mixed in palm oil mixing animal fats in palm oil prov:wasAssociatedWith Gautam Agro India found that animal fats and other harmful substances were being mixed in palm oil FIR against seven persons fflo:issuedBy Navi Mumbai Police Navi Mumbai Police has filed an FIR against them64:T7ce,'Spurious' food items seized at Ferozepur meritorious school tribuneindia.com Anirudh Gupta
Ferozepur, December 3
A day after 74 students of a meritorious school in Sangrur had to be hospitalised after consuming ‘substandard’ food, a team from the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) today found the glaring anomalies in material being used to prepare meals at Government Meritorious School, Hakumatwala.
The team seized several flour bags and refined oil tins, which were allegedly adulterated, besides the contractor didn’t had a valid licence from the department concerned.
Abhinav Chauhan, Food and Safety Officer, FSSAI, said the quality of food material being served to students seemed substandard. “Though we need to wait for the report, flour and oil seemed adulterated,” said Chauhan, adding that there was no upkeep of the storage area.
Chauhan said most students complained about the food being served. He said he had asked students to inform him in future and their identity would be kept confidential.
Gurbir Singh, Principal, Government Meritorious School, Hakumatwala village, said he was on a leave and food was being served as per defined norms. He said he hadn’t received any compliant from 900 students. refined oil flour adulteration unknown adulterant seizure suspected Hakumatwala, Ferozepur, Punjab, India FSSAI finding of substandard food at Government Meritorious School Hakumatwala prov:wasAttributedTo Government Meritorious School Hakumatwala found the glaring anomalies in material being used to prepare meals at Government Meritorious School, Hakumatwala refined oil fflo:hasAdulterant unknown adulterant flour and oil seemed adulterated adulterated flour and oil fflo:foundAt Government Meritorious School Hakumatwala flour and oil seemed adulterated adulteration in refined oil fflo:foundAtStep Government Meritorious School Hakumatwala found the glaring anomalies in material being used to prepare meals at Government Meritorious School65:Td1f,Nashik Fda Cracks Down On Adulterated Food Items, Oil | Nashik News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Nashik: The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) of the Nashik division has seized adulterated food items and spurious cooking oil from different parts of the district over the last 15-20 days.
The total amount of seized items is worth over Rs 20 lakh. FDA officials said that teams were formed to conduct raids in various outlets to prevent the sale of adulterated food items during Diwali.
On Tuesday, shrikhand and loose oil, worth over Rs two lakh, were confiscated by the Nashik Food and Drug Administration (FDA).
FDA officials said on Monday that they raided a food shop in the city and found boxes of shrikhand with no manufacturing or expiry date. Taking serious note of the same, the FDA officials seized shrikhand boxes weighing over 61 kg and worth over Rs 18,000. FDA food inspectors also raided an oil stockiest in Sinnar and seized 53 cans of loose soyabean oil, another 41 boxes of re-used refined soyabean oil and 28 boxes of re-used palmolein oil, collectively worth Rs1.93 lakh.
On November 1, the FDA officials raided a cold storage in Satpur and found over 10,000 kg of chilli powder worth over Rs 16 lakh and another 4,200 kg of coriander powder worth Rs 2.35 lakh, which was stored since March 2023 without any lable on packets. 
Suspecting that they could be stored for adulteration, the police seized the articles and sent the samples for further investigation to check whether they are adulterated.
On October 10, the FDA raided a house in Sinnar and found a man adulterating milk with the help of milk powder and colourless liquid. The FDA found 18 kg of dairy milk powder, 34 kg of milk powder and 170 litres of colourless liquid. With the help of these substances, the man had prepared 420 litres of cow milk, which he sold in markets. The FDA has registered a complaint against the milk seller with the Sinnar police station. loose oil shrikhand adulteration substandard seizure suspected Nashik, Maharashtra, India seizure of shrikhand and loose oil fflo:issuedBy Nashik Food and Drug Administration shrikhand and loose oil, worth over Rs two lakh, were confiscated by the Nashik Food and Drug Administration milk fflo:hasAdulterant milk powder adulterating milk with the help of milk powder milk fflo:hasAdulterant colourless liquid adulterating milk with the help of milk powder and colourless liquid milk powder fflo:isSubstituteFor milk adulterating milk with the help of milk powder seizure of adulterated food items and spurious cooking oil fflo:issuedBy Nashik Food and Drug Administration FDA of the Nashik division has seized adulterated food items and spurious cooking oil Shrikhand seizure incident fflo:foundAtStep Retail raided a food shop in the city and found boxes of shrikhand Seizure of loose soyabean oil fflo:foundAtStep Distribution raided an oil stockiest in Sinnar and seized 53 cans of loose soyabean oil re-used refined soyabean oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod reuse of oil re-used refined soyabean oil re-used palmolein oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod reuse of oil re-used palmolein oil chilli powder fflo:hasAdulterant suspected adulteration Suspecting that they could be stored for adulteration milk adulteration act prov:used milk adulterating milk with the help of milk powder and colourless liquid66:Tb41,Mumbai News: Adulterated Sweets, Edible Oil Worth ₹1.64 Lakh Seized By FDA freepressjournal.in Mumbai: Ahead of Diwali, the Food And Drug Administration (FDA) has raided three establishments in the western suburbs and seized adulterated sweets and edible oil worth ₹1,64,655. A senior official, who was part of the raiding team, said they have collected the samples of the seized materials and sent them to laboratories for testing.
Following a tip-off, the agency impounded refined sunflower oil and RBD palmolein oil worth ₹1,07,120 from Pragati Oil Mill in Sakinaka, mawa worth ₹52,270 from Brijwasi Mawawala in Borivali, and used cooking oil and RBD palmolein oil valued at ₹5,265 from Mangaldeep foods in Sakinaka. “We are also tracking mawa coming from Gujarat as most of the adulterated or spurious mawa is being exported from Gujarat through trucks, buses or trains. Last year, we had caught such consignments,” informed the official.
FDA launches an all-out inspection drive across all sweet shops
Given the trend of an increase in adulterated and substandard food materials flooding markets during the festive season, the FDA has initiated an inspection drive covering all sweets shops in Mumbai. “We had received several complaints regarding manufacturing and sale of adulterated milk products. Moreover, we got a tip-off following which three teams were deputed, who carried out raids in zones 12 and 7 of the city,” said the official.
FDA Joint Commissioner (Food) Shailesh Adhav said, “Products were seized for reasons such as label contravention and storage in unhygienic condition, and suspected to be substandard.” The drive will continue and appropriate actions will be taken against those who violate norms and regulations, he warned.
Key highlights of FDA raid
Refined sunflower oil, RBD palmolein oil worth ₹1,07,120 seized from Pragati Oil Mill in Sakinaka
Mawa worth ₹52,270 found at Brijwasi Mawawala in Borivali
Used cooking oil, RBD palmolein oil valued at ₹5,265 impounded from Mangaldeep foods in Sakinaka
Products seized for reasons such as label contravention, storage in unhygienic condition, substandard quality
Drive will continue covering all sweets shops in Mumbai sunflower oil palmolein oil used cooking oil substandard mislabeling raid seizure suspected Mumbai, Maharashtra, India Mumbai Diwali Raid prov:used sunflower oil impounded refined sunflower oil Mumbai Diwali Raid prov:used mawa mawa worth ₹52,270 from Brijwasi Mawawala refined sunflower oil fflo:foundAt Pragati Oil Mill Refined sunflower oil... seized from Pragati Oil Mill mawa fflo:foundAt Brijwasi Mawawala Mawa worth ₹52,270 found at Brijwasi Mawawala label contravention fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling Products were seized for reasons such as label contravention FDA raid fflo:targets sweets shops Drive will continue covering all sweets shops67:Td37,Adani Wilmar files FIR against sale of counterfeit ‘Fortune’ products by Jumbotail financialexpress.com FMCG major Adani Wilmar has filed a police complaint against B2B platform Jumbotail Pvt. Ltd for allegedly distributing counterfeit ‘Fortune’ products. Acting upon this complaint, the law enforcement authorities immediately conducted a raid at the B2B platform’s warehouse, and found ‘alarming quantities of counterfeit products bearing the Adani Wilmar brand name’, it said in a statement. The seized products included 126 pet bottles of Fortune Kacchi Ghani Mustard Oil (1 litre packs) without the lid, 37 fake Fortune Refined Soybean Oil (1 litre pouches), and 16 pet bottles of Fortune Sarso Oil (1 litre packs).
Adani Wilmar has lodged the FIR at Badalpur police station in Gautam Budhnagar District, Uttar Pradesh. “At Adani Wilmar, consumer trust and product integrity are paramount. We are deeply concerned about counterfeit products circulating in the market and posing risks to consumers’ health. Taking this matter seriously, we are collaborating with authorities to swiftly identify sources of counterfeits, and take decisive actions against unscrupulous traders. We are committed to offering patrons with high-quality, authentic, and pure products. We will continue to engage in stringent measures to safeguard consumers’ interests and maintain integrity of the brand,” an Adani Wilmar spokesperson said.
The company discovered the malpractice during a routine market survey when a trader raised concerns about discrepancies in the product packaging after making a purchase from B2B online platform Jumbotail. It said that an in-depth examination of the reported products revealed significant mismatches in Batch Code details, fake QR codes, and different packaging materials, confirming the presence of counterfeit products.
Earlier this month, Adani Wilmar had said that its first quarter sales had slumped 15 per cent as a sharp fall in edible prices eclipsed strong demand for its food products. Since last year, edible oil prices have been on decline, hit by lower consumer demand in developed economies, easing of supply in the Black Sea region and strong production of oilseeds. However, it stated that the sales in its food and fast moving consumer goods segment was up 30 per cent on strong demand even as overall sales was dragged by a 15 per cent decline. mustard oil soybean oil counterfeit raid FIR filed alleged Gautam Budhnagar, Uttar Pradesh, India in-depth examination fflo:producesIndicator different packaging materials in-depth examination of the reported products revealed significant mismatches in Batch Code details, fake QR codes, and different packaging materials counterfeit products discovery prov:wasAttributedTo Adani Wilmar The company discovered the malpractice during a routine market survey counterfeit products discovery fflo:producedBy routine market survey discovered the malpractice during a routine market survey counterfeit products discovery fflo:producedBy in-depth examination in-depth examination of the reported products revealed significant mismatches counterfeit products discovery fflo:producedBy in-depth examination in-depth examination of the reported products revealed significant mismatches counterfeit products discovery fflo:foundAtStep Jumbotail purchase from B2B online platform Jumbotail68:T9a3,Adani Wilmar Files Police Complaint Against Sale Of Counterfeit Fortune Brand Products freepressjournal.in Edible oil major Adani Wilmar Ltd on Saturday said it has lodged a police complaint against a B2B platform for allegedly distributing counterfeit products in the name of its 'Fortune' brand.
As part of a routine market survey, Adani Wilmar representatives discovered the malpractice.
In a statement, the company said it has lodged an FIR through their agency, against the B2B platform for alleged distribution of counterfeit products on the platform.
The FIR has been lodged at Badalpur police station in Gautam Budhnagar District, Uttar Pradesh.
Adani Wilmar said the law enforcement authorities conducted a raid at the warehouse of B2B (business to business) platform "wherein alarming quantities of counterfeit products bearing the 'Fortune' brand name, the flagship brand of Adani Wilmar were seized." The seized products included 126 pet bottles of Fortune Kacchi Ghani Mustard Oil (1 litre pack) without the lid, 37 fake Fortune Refined Soybean Oil (1 litre pouches), and 16 pet bottles of Fortune Sarso Oil (1 litre packs).
"We are deeply concerned about counterfeit products circulating in the market and posing risks to consumers' health," an Adani Wilmar spokesperson said.
Taking this matter seriously, the spokesperson said the company is collaborating with authorities to swiftly identify sources of counterfeits, and take decisive actions against unscrupulous traders.
According to the statement, the company initiated an in-depth examination of the reported product, which revealed significant mismatches in Batch Code details, fake QR codes, and different packaging materials, confirming the presence of counterfeit products. Fortune Kacchi Ghani Mustard Oil Fortune Refined Soybean Oil Fortune Sarso Oil counterfeit FIR lodged raid alleged Badalpur, Gautam Budhnagar District, Uttar Pradesh, India Counterfeit Fortune Brand Distribution Act prov:used Fortune Refined Soybean Oil fake Fortune Refined Soybean Oil Counterfeit Fortune Brand Distribution Act prov:used Fortune Sarso Oil 16 pet bottles of Fortune Sarso Oil Counterfeit Fortune Brand Seizure fflo:inRegion Gautam Budhnagar District, Uttar Pradesh FIR has been lodged at Badalpur police station in Gautam Budhnagar District, Uttar Pradesh Counterfeit Fortune Brand Distribution Method fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling distributing counterfeit products in the name of its 'Fortune' brand69:T912,Adani Wilmar files police complaint against sale of counterfeit Fortune brand products indiatimes.com NEW DELHI: Edible oil major Adani Wilmar Ltd on Saturday said it has lodged a police complaint against a B2B platform for allegedly distributing counterfeit products in the name of its '
Fortune' brand. As part of a routine market survey, Adani Wilmar representatives discovered the malpractice. 
In a statement, the company said it has lodged an FIR through their agency, against the B2B platform for alleged distribution of counterfeit products on the platform. 
The FIR has been lodged at Badalpur police station in Gautam Budhnagar District, 
Uttar Pradesh. 
Adani Wilmar said the law enforcement authorities conducted a raid at the warehouse of B2B (business to business) platform "wherein alarming quantities of counterfeit products bearing the 'Fortune' brand name, the flagship brand of Adani Wilmar were seized." 
The seized products included 126 pet bottles of Fortune Kacchi Ghani Mustard Oil (1 litre pack) without the lid, 37 fake Fortune Refined Soybean Oil (1 litre pouches), and 16 pet bottles of Fortune Sarso Oil (1 litre packs). 
"We are deeply concerned about counterfeit products circulating in the market and posing risks to consumers' health," an Adani Wilmar spokesperson said. 
Taking this matter seriously, the spokesperson said the company is collaborating with authorities to swiftly identify sources of counterfeits, and take decisive actions against unscrupulous traders. 
According to the statement, the company initiated an in-depth examination of the reported product, which revealed significant mismatches in Batch Code details, fake QR codes, and different packaging materials, confirming the presence of counterfeit products. Fortune Kacchi Ghani Mustard Oil Fortune Refined Soybean Oil Fortune Sarso Oil counterfeit FIR lodged raid alleged Gautam Budhnagar, Uttar Pradesh, India Counterfeit Fortune Oil Distribution Act prov:used Fortune Kacchi Ghani Mustard Oil counterfeit products bearing the 'Fortune' brand name Counterfeit Fortune Oil Distribution Act prov:used Fortune Refined Soybean Oil fake Fortune Refined Soybean Oil counterfeit products fflo:producedBy in-depth examination initiated an in-depth examination of the reported product, which revealed significant mismatches6a:T73b,Food Dept Seizes 831l Mustard Oil | Kanpur News - Times of India indiatimes.com Kanpur: Food security and drug administration department on Sunday seized around 831 litre of mustard oil worth Rs 1,14,764 and collected 19 samples of food items and sent them to lab for testing.
The mustard oil was seized from three vendors, and the biggest stock was of a trader in Ghatampur town. The team, led by Ratnakar Singh, food security officer, seized around 799 litre of mustard oil worth Rs 1,11,860.
Another seizure of 22 litre worth Rs 2,904 from a shopkeeper of Maharajpur. 
The team, led by Shantanu Kumar, food security officer, also seized around 34 litre of refined soyabean oil worth Rs 4,420 from the same premises.
According to assistant commissioner 
Vijay Kumar, around 15 teams after roaming in the district collected 19 samples of cheese, mawa, papad, besan, maida, rice bran oil, mixed milk and sweets from 4 vendors.
Singh said raids were conducted in compliance with the orders of commissioner, food security and drug administration to provide pure and standard food items and articles on the occasion of the coming 
Holi festival. mustard oil soyabean oil substandard adulteration Seizure of 799 litre mustard oil Seizure of 34 litre refined soyabean oil suspected Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India Seizure of 799 litre mustard oil fflo:targets mustard oil seized around 799 litre of mustard oil Seizure of 34 litre refined soyabean oil fflo:targets refined soyabean oil seized around 34 litre of refined soyabean oil Lab testing for food items fso:isPerformedOn 19 samples of food items collected 19 samples of food items and sent them to lab for testing Seizure of 831l Mustard Oil fflo:issuedBy Food security and drug administration department Food security and drug administration department on Sunday seized around 831 litre of mustard oil6b:T654,Bhopal: Lose oil sale; FDA suspends mills’ licence freepressjournal.in Bhopal (Madhya Pradesh): Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) Department, which had conducted a raid at Shankar Oil Mills located in Azad Market on Friday, has suspended the latter’s licence. The order to suspend licence was issued on Saturday. Joint Collector and FDA officer Sanjay Shrivastava passed the order.
FDA team had seized 40 tons of soybean-palmolein oil, according to FDA officials. The FDA team inspected Shankar Oil Mills on Friday afternoon. Its management was found selling loose soybean and palmolein oil, which is prohibited under Food Safety and Standards Act.
The team said that around 30 tons of soybean oil and 10 tons of palm oil were found at the spot, which had been confiscated.
Whether the oil was adulterated would also be investigated. In the investigation so far, unpacked oil was sold, which is against the norms as per Food Safety and Standards Act.
The FDA officer Sanjay Shrivastava said, “Other companies involved in the same work will be investigated. After the raid, people involved in selling unpacked oil are alerted and most of them are on radar of investigation team.” soybean oil palmolein oil mislabeling substandard suspension of licence suspected Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh, India selling loose soybean and palmolein oil fflo:constitutes violation of Food Safety and Standards Act selling loose soybean and palmolein oil, which is prohibited under Food Safety and Standards Act suspension of licence fflo:issuedBy Sanjay Shrivastava Joint Collector and FDA officer Sanjay Shrivastava passed the order6c:T1395,Argemone poisoning claims life in Jawalamukhi, alert sounded in HP’s Kangra hindustantimes.com Argemone poisoning claims life in Jawalamukhi, alert sounded in HP’s Kangra
The victims had bought the mustard from a local market in Khudian. It is learnt that the wholesaler is based at Paragpur area and it is possible that contaminated mustard seeds may have been sold in other areas as well.
After argemone poisoning, also known as epidemic dropsy, claimed a man’s life in Khundian of Jawalamukhi, an alert was sounded in Kangra district on Friday.
Three other family members of the victim, Vijay Kumar, are also being treated for epidemic dropsy, which is caused after one consumes edible oils contaminated with Argemone mexicana (Mexican prickly poppy), a weed that wildly grows in most parts of the country. Its seeds resemble those of mustard.
Kangra deputy commissioner Nipun Jindal has cautioned people against buying mustard seeds from the open market and using oil extracted from it. “Anyone who has bought mustard from the open market in recent days should not use it or oil extracted from it for their own safety,” said Jindal.
The victims had bought the mustard from a local market in Khudian. It is learnt that the wholesaler is based at Paragpur area and it is possible that contaminated mustard seeds may have been sold in other areas as well.
Meanwhile, Kangra chief medical officer Dr Gurdarshan Gupta said that preliminary investigation suggests that the affected family bought the mustard seeds in August and got its oil extracted in a local mill.
The affected family, after consuming the oil, suffered diarrhoea, vomiting and swelling and redness on parts of their body. “They sought treatment in different hospitals, including the Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research (PGIMER). However, one of the patients succumbed to the disease,”said Dr Gupta.
The family stopped consuming the oil when other members of the family developed similar symptoms, which helped the doctors diagnose the disease. The oil samples have been sent to the lab for further confirmation, he said.
Know the disease
Epidemic dropsy is caused due to the consumption of edible oils adulterated with Argemone mexicana (Mexican prickly poppy). Two major toxic alkaloids – sanguinarine and dehydrosanguinarine – found in the oil cause widespread capillary dilatation, proliferation and increased capillary permeability.
Symptoms
The illness begins with gastroenteric symptoms, followed by cutaneous erythema (redness of the skin) and pigmentation. Other symptoms are bilateral swelling of the legs, often associated with erythema, diarrhoea, dyspnoea, and glaucoma.
Persons of all ages and sexes can be affected, except breastfed infants.
Previous outbreaks
Epidemic dropsy was first reported in Calcutta in 1877. Since then, outbreaks have been reported in several states, primarily in north India.
The 1998 epidemic in New Delhi was the largest outbreak, in which over 60 persons lost their lives and more than 3,000 victims were hospitalised. The last outbreak was reported in a Punjab-based family in 2014. mustard oil adulteration contamination Argemone mexicana public alert suspected Jawalamukhi, Kangra, Himachal Pradesh, India Argemone mexicana fflo:causesEffect epidemic dropsy epidemic dropsy, which is caused after one consumes edible oils contaminated with Argemone mexicana Argemone mexicana fflo:causesEffect Epidemic dropsy Epidemic dropsy is caused due to the consumption of edible oils adulterated with Argemone mexicana dehydrosanguinarine fflo:causesEffect widespread capillary dilatation sanguinarine and dehydrosanguinarine – found in the oil cause widespread capillary dilatation Argemone mexicana fflo:isSubstituteFor mustard seeds Its seeds resemble those of mustard mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant Argemone mexicana edible oils contaminated with Argemone mexicana Argemone mexicana fflo:commonIn India weed that wildly grows in most parts of the country Argemone mexicana fflo:foundAt fflo:Distribution contaminated mustard seeds may have been sold in other areas mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant Argemone mexicana edible oils adulterated with Argemone mexicana mustard oil fflo:outputOf local mill got its oil extracted in a local mill mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod Adulteration with Argemone seeds edible oils adulterated with Argemone mexicana Epidemic dropsy fflo:hasEffectType AcuteEffect suffered diarrhoea, vomiting and swelling mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant Argemone mexicana Epidemic dropsy is caused due to the consumption of edible oils adulterated with Argemone mexicana Epidemic dropsy fflo:causesEffect gastroenteric symptoms The illness begins with gastroenteric symptoms Epidemic dropsy fflo:commonIn north India outbreaks have been reported ... primarily in north India Epidemic dropsy fflo:commonIn Calcutta first reported in Calcutta in 1877 1998 New Delhi epidemic dropsy outbreak fflo:inRegion New Delhi The 1998 epidemic in New Delhi6d:Taa2,Govt Cracks Down On Sale Of Adulterated Coconut Oil | Thiruvananthapuram News - Times of India indiatimes.com Thiruvananthapuram: The food safety department has launched a special drive across the state as part of its crackdown on adulterated coconut oil. Named Operation Oil, searches have been conducted in as many as 100 locations across the state, health and family welfare minister Veena George said.
The minister said that the manufacturers of products found to be adulterated or not meeting the standards have been served notices and have also been fined.
The minister added that the searches will continue in the coming days as well.
The minister said that all the manufacturers should mandatorily obtain brand registration for their products. One manufacturer can come up with only one brand of coconut oil in the state. This will be strictly enforced as part of efforts to curb the sale of adulterated coconut oil. The food safety department will also examine if sulphur is being mixed with the oil.
The minister said that the food safety department is conducting various initiatives to ensure sale of safe and clean food. As part of the campaign âNalla Bhakshanam Nadinte Avakashamâ, multiple programs like operation shawarma, operation Matsya, operation jaggery etc were conducted. Since October, as many as 4,905 searches have been conducted under these programmes. As many as 651 samples have been collected and notices have been served and fines have been slapped on 294 institutions.
The minister said that the state government has come up with detailed guidelines on shawarma preparation. The state food safety department has come at the second spot in the food safety index of the 
Food Safety and Standards Authority of India. coconut oil adulteration substandard sulphur Operation Oil notices fines suspected Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, India Operation Oil fflo:targets coconut oil crackdown on adulterated coconut oil. Named Operation Oil Operation Oil fflo:issuedBy food safety department The food safety department has launched a special drive across the state as part of its crackdown on adulterated coconut oil. Named Operation Oil state food safety department SCHEMA_MISMATCH ranked second in food safety index state food safety department has come at the second spot in the food safety index Operation Oil fflo:issuedBy food safety department The food safety department has launched a special drive... Named Operation Oil notices served on 294 institutions fflo:issuedBy state food safety department notices have been served and fines have been slapped on 294 institutions fines slapped on 294 institutions fflo:issuedBy state food safety department fines have been slapped on 294 institutions6e:Td0d,Operation Oil: manufacturer to be allowed to launch only one brand of oil  thehindu.com Tightening the noose around the adulterated coconut oil manufacturers, the State government has decided to allow a manufacturer to launch only one brand of coconut oil. The norm would be strictly enforced in the State with a view to curbing the sale of spurious coconut oil, said Health Minister Veena George here on Wednesday.
Requesting all coconut oil producers to obtain brand registration compulsorily, the Minister said the government would not allow the sale of coconut oil without brand registration. Legal action would be initiated against the coconut oils without brand registration after seizing of the stock. Further, the presence of sulphur in the oil would be checked by the authorities, said Ms. George.
The Food Safety department launched a special drive called ‘Operation Oil’ as part of curbing the sale of adulterated coconut oil in the State. Over 100 centers were inspected in the last two days and notices were issued against the violators of safety norms who were also slapped with fines. Inspections by the Food Safety Department would continue in the coming days, said the Minister.
To ensure safe food, a campaign ‘good food, right of the society’ was implemented by the department. As part of this campaign, inspections were carried out under various names—Operation Shawarma, Operation Matsya, and Operation Jaggery. Since the month of October, 4,905 inspections were conducted in various districts. Around 6,959 kg of stale fish was seized and destroyed by the officials as part of 446 inspections conducted under Operation Matsya.
Similarly, legal action was taken against 177 shops that did not comply with the norms under Operation Shawarma. As many as 651 samples had been collected and sent for lab tests. Notices were issued against 294 institutions and fines were collected. The State also issued guidelines for making shawarma and implemented the Clean Street Food Hub project, said the Minister.
Published - November 16, 2022 08:09 pm IST coconut oil adulteration substandard Operation Oil suspected Kerala, India Operation Shawarma fflo:targets shawarma legal action was taken against 177 shops that did not comply with the norms under Operation Shawarma Operation Matsya fflo:targets fish 6,959 kg of stale fish was seized and destroyed by the officials as part of 446 inspections conducted under Operation Matsya Operation Jaggery fflo:targets jaggery inspections were carried out under various names—Operation Shawarma, Operation Matsya, and Operation Jaggery coconut oil fflo:hasAdulterant sulphur presence of sulphur in the oil would be checked Operation Oil fflo:targets coconut oil special drive called 'Operation Oil' as part of curbing the sale of adulterated coconut oil Operation Oil fflo:issuedBy Food Safety department Food Safety department launched a special drive called 'Operation Oil' brand registration norm lkif:created_by State government State government has decided to allow a manufacturer to launch only one brand of coconut oil brand registration norm fflo:appliesToFood coconut oil allow a manufacturer to launch only one brand of coconut oil fines fflo:issuedBy Food Safety department notices were issued against the violators of safety norms who were also slapped with fines6f:T4d2,Hyderabad: 7 LPG cylinders seized in cordon and search; 10 held siasat.com Hyderabad: The Chaderghat police on Sunday detained 10 persons and 1 history-sheeter, for the illegal sale of gas cylinders, and seized 45 bikes as owners failed to produce supporting documents.
The police searched houses as part of the operation, seven LPG cylinders used in the illegal sale and refill, and 65 liquor bottles were seized after raiding a belt shop.
During the search, the police bused an oil adulteration racket and seized 75 kgs of adulterated oil in which animal carcasses were also used.
Over 500 police personnel participated in the cordon and search, led by DCP (east) Sunil Dutt. edible oil adulteration animal carcasses seizure alleged Hyderabad, Telangana, India adulterated oil fflo:hasAdulterant animal carcasses seized 75 kgs of adulterated oil in which animal carcasses were also used adulterated oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod addition of animal carcasses adulterated oil in which animal carcasses were also used seizure of 75 kgs of adulterated oil fflo:issuedBy Chaderghat police The Chaderghat police ... seized 75 kgs of adulterated oil seizure of adulterated oil fflo:targets adulterated oil seized 75 kgs of adulterated oil70:T626,Mustard, Palm Olein Oil Worth â¹7.7l Seized | Kanpur News - Times of India indiatimes.com Kanpur: Teams of FSA on Thursday seized over 604 liters of mustard and palm olein oil worth Rs 7,67,800 from various vendors in city.
Besides, the department also collected as many as 23 samples for lab testing. According to Vijay Pratap Singh assistant commissioner (food) â II /designated officer on Thursday, raids were conducted in some big stores and sweets shops of the city.
Samples of coriander powder, Soya Sauce and Paneer Masala were collected from Reliance retails Govind Nagar, three samples of sweets were collected by the team led by additional city magistrate first from Shanti Niketan Kidwai Nagar.
Around 204 litre of mustard oil was collected for loose sale, 1000 liters of rice bran oil for loose sale, and 2500kg of Palmolein were seized by the department. Samples of sweets, Mawa, and spices were also collected from some big hotels and shopping complexes. mustard oil palm olein oil substandard adulteration seizure suspected Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India seizure of mustard and palm olein oil fflo:issuedBy FSA Teams of FSA on Thursday seized over 604 liters of mustard and palm olein oil Paneer Masala sample fflo:collectedAt Retail Samples of coriander powder, Soya Sauce and Paneer Masala were collected from Reliance retails Mawa sample fflo:collectedAt Retail Samples of sweets, Mawa, and spices were also collected from some big hotels spices sample fflo:collectedAt Retail Samples of sweets, Mawa, and spices were also collected from some big hotels71:T8c7,Uttarakhand: A year on, mustard oil manufacturer, supplier penalised for adulteration | Dehradun News - Times of India indiatimes.com In a matter of violation of food safety standards, a local court in Pauri penalised a supplier and a manufacturer of mustard oil with Rs 3 lakh, holding them guilty of adulteration. The sample was collected a few days before the festival of Holi in 2021. 
The Food Safety and Drug Administration (FSDA) department becomes more active during festive seasons to ensure no adulterated food items are sold in the market.
The court of additional district magistrate of Pauri Ela Giri imposed a penalty of Rs 2 lakh on the mustard oil manufacturer at Balaji Udyog located in Haryana's Rewari and a penalty of Rs 1 lakh on the supplier Sandip Jain who runs his business at Najibabad road in Kotdwar.
 FSDA officer Rachna Lal collected samples in March 2021 during the frisking of a vehicle loaded with food items in Pauri. The samples of sugar, gram flour and mustard oil were sent to the lab for examination. In July 2021, its report came, which suggested that mustard oil was adulterated. The FSDA officials filed a case at the ADM court in October 2021 mustard oil adulteration unspecified penalty lab_confirmed Pauri, Uttarakhand, India mustard oil adulteration finding fflo:inRegion Uttarakhand Uttarakhand: A year on, mustard oil manufacturer, supplier penalised for adulteration mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant unspecified adulterant report came, which suggested that mustard oil was adulterated mustard oil adulteration finding prov:wasAttributedTo Balaji Udyog penalty of Rs 2 lakh on the mustard oil manufacturer at Balaji Udyog mustard oil adulteration finding prov:wasAttributedTo Sandip Jain penalty of Rs 1 lakh on the supplier Sandip Jain mustard oil sample fso:hasLocation Pauri frisking of a vehicle loaded with food items in Pauri mustard oil adulteration finding fflo:foundIn mustard oil report came, which suggested that mustard oil was adulterated mustard oil adulteration finding fflo:triggeredAction penalty of Rs 3 lakh penalised a supplier and a manufacturer of mustard oil with Rs 3 lakh mustard oil adulteration finding fflo:foundAtStep Distribution frisking of a vehicle loaded with food items72:T64b,2500 litres of suspected adulterated cooking oil seized thehindu.com A joint team of the Special Branch police and the Food Safety Department personnel on Wednesday seized 2,500 litres of suspected adulterated cooking oil during a raid on an oil mill at Vennampalli village in Saidapur mandal of Karimnagar district.
The raid was conducted following complaints of sale of “adulterated” cooking oil by labelling it as “refined sunflower oil” in plastic containers at Kaveri oil mill of “Vishnu Industries”, a police press release said.
During the inspection, the joint squad reportedly found alleged violations of the stipulated norms under various counts. Samples of the seized oil were sent to the Food Laboratory for analysis, the press release added.
Karimnagar Police Special Branch Inspectors G Venkateshwarlu and B Santosh Kumar led the raid.
Published - October 12, 2022 08:45 pm IST cooking oil adulteration mislabeling seizure raid suspected Vennampalli, Karimnagar, Telangana, India Labeling cooking oil as refined sunflower oil fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling labelling it as “refined sunflower oil” Adulteration of sunflower oil at Kaveri oil mill prov:wasAssociatedWith Vishnu Industries Kaveri oil mill of "Vishnu Industries" Analysis of seized oil fso:isPerformedOn Sample of seized sunflower oil Samples of the seized oil were sent to the Food Laboratory for analysis Analysis of seized oil fso:isPerformedAt Food Laboratory sent to the Food Laboratory for analysis Sample of seized cooking oil fflo:collectedAt Processing Samples of the seized oil were sent to the Food Laboratory73:Ta43,FDA adopts zero-tolerance policy for edible oil sold loose and in reused tins | Nagpur News - Times of India indiatimes.com Nagpur: The Food and drugs administration (FDA) has stepped up its crackdown on edible oils sold loose and also in reused tins.
In 2022 till date, FDA has seized 2,075 kgs of edible oils worth more than Rs 2.99 lakhs. These seizures were from traders found violating norms. The raids were conducted by assistant commissioner Abhay Deshpande and joint commissioner Suresh Annapure.
On September 19, FDA had raided a grocery shop at Saoner seizing around 358 kg loose oil worth Rs 46,542.
On September 27, around 686.8 kgs of loose edible oil worth Rs 86,536 were seized from M/s Shree Trading company, Rameshwari Road, belonging to one Amritlal Sahu.
Deshpande said selling of loose edible oil is prohibited as per the regulations mentioned in the Food Safety and Standard Act, 2002. âThe loose edible oils have higher chances of being adulterated and substandard quality. Consumers should not go for cheaper loose edible oils and face health complications,â said Deshpande.
FDA, continuing its raiding actions, have commenced a consistent drive against the unscrupulous traders selling loose edible oil in reused tins.
Around 6,684.85 kgs of edible oils worth more than Rs 10.46 lakhs were seized this year by FDA team.
On September 16, FDA team conducted a raid at Prabhu Trading at Quetta Colony seizing more than 802 kgs of edible oil worth more than Rs 1.41 lakhs.
In yet another raid on September 26, the FDA team had seized 973.4 kgs of edible oils worth more than Rs 1.19 lakhs stored in reused tins from the premises of M/s Mohandas Hariram and company at Teliapura.
Deshpande said oil merchants associations and traders' bodies were told not to sell oil in loose quantities. âThere would be periodic and random raids on oil merchants and traders,â said Deshpande stating reused tins can prove perilous for health as âno one knows whether they were properly cleaned or dried before refilling with labels of the branded companiesâ. edible oil substandard adulteration seizure suspected Nagpur, Maharashtra, India Food Safety and Standard Act, 2002 fflo:appliesToFood edible oil selling of loose edible oil is prohibited as per the regulations mentioned in the Food Safety and Standard Act, 2002 seizure of 2,075 kgs of edible oils fflo:targets edible oil FDA has seized 2,075 kgs of edible oils seizure of 2,075 kgs of edible oils fflo:issuedBy Food and drugs administration (FDA) FDA has seized 2,075 kgs of edible oils seizure of edible oils fflo:issuedBy FDA seized this year by FDA team74:T774,Using counterfeit packaging lands Ropar trader in police net tribuneindia.com Ropar, September 15
The police have arrested a person and seized counterfeit packaging of Tata salt, Patanjali mustard oil and Harpic toilet cleaner from his possession.
The accused has been identified as Gian Singh, a resident of Bann Majra village.
Hussanpreet Singh from Speed Search and Security Networks had lodged a complaint in this regard.
The complainant said there were multiple reports of counterfeit products (mentioned above) being sold in the area. He said salt and mustard oil of cheaper brands was being refilled and sold in packaging of branded products.
SHO Harpreet Singh said they had seized 497 packets of Tata salt, 170 bottles of Patanjali mustard oil and 961 bottles of Harpic. Cops also confiscated 140 grams of opium from the accused. A case has been registered under Section 63 of the Copyright Act and the NDPS Act. mustard oil substitution mislabeling counterfeit cheaper brands arrest seizure alleged Ropar, Punjab, India mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod refilling cheaper brands in branded packaging salt and mustard oil of cheaper brands was being refilled and sold in packaging of branded products Counterfeit packaging operation prov:wasAssociatedWith Gian Singh The police have arrested a person... identified as Gian Singh Counterfeit packaging operation prov:used mustard oil seized counterfeit packaging of Tata salt, Patanjali mustard oil Counterfeit packaging operation prov:used salt seized counterfeit packaging of Tata salt Refilling cheaper brands in branded packaging fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling sold in packaging of branded products Refilling cheaper brands in branded packaging fflo:hasFraudType Substitution salt and mustard oil of cheaper brands was being refilled Arrest and seizure fflo:targets mustard oil seized counterfeit packaging of Tata salt, Patanjali mustard oil75:Tb2e,Chennai: Shop with 4.3 tonnes of blended cooking oil in sump sealed indiatimes.com CHENNAI: Food safety officials in Chennai on Tuesday sealed a small oil shop in Pillayar Koil Street in West Mambalam for illegally stocking more than 4300 kg of blended cooking oil - palm oil and sunflower - and selling it without packaging.
 Oil was seized and samples were sent to food safety labs for detailed analysis.
Officials said the source of the oil was still unknown.
This could be just the tip of the iceberg, they said.
Many dealers may be pushing cooking oil, with no quality checks, to small traders, who stock large quantities without a licence and sell them illegally, according to the officials. 
"This shop was just four streets away from our office. It was shocking to see that this tiny shop can hold a stock of 4.3 tonne of oil," said Chennai's designated food safety officer Dr P Satheesh Kumar. The shop bought oil in barrels from different sources and stored it in a large underground tank. A motor was used to transfer the blended oil into an overhead tank. A pipe and tap connected to the tank were inside the shop. People bought their own vessels to buy oil at less than half the price of branded products. 
"Sale of unpacked oil is banned in 
Tamil Nadu. The vendor has also blended two oils in the most unscientific manner," he said. The oil collected in bottles had dust and sand, he added. "The trader had a licence for wholesale, but he was selling it in retail as well," he said.
When food safety officials attempted to seal the shop, residents and members of the traders' association protested. Officials explained the rules and the potential health hazards.
"Inquiry is on to find the source. We also want to check if there are many more shops selling oil like this," Dr Satheesh Kumar said.
 The trader has been given a show-cause notice.
Charges would be framed against the trader under the Food Safety Act if food labs declared the oil as "unfit for human consumption," officials said. blended cooking oil contamination substandard unsafe_food dust sand sealed show-cause notice suspected Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India blended cooking oil fkg:hasIngredient sunflower oil blended cooking oil - palm oil and sunflower Sealing of oil shop in Pillayar Koil Street fflo:issuedBy Chennai Food Safety Officials Food safety officials in Chennai on Tuesday sealed a small oil shop detailed analysis fso:isPerformedOn Oil samples samples were sent to food safety labs for detailed analysis blended cooking oil fflo:hasAdulterant dust The oil collected in bottles had dust and sand blended cooking oil fflo:hasAdulterant sand The oil collected in bottles had dust and sand blended cooking oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod unscientific blending blended two oils in the most unscientific manner trader fflo:foundAt retail he was selling it in retail as well76:T971,With Onam around, adulterated coconut oil floods Kerala market newindianexpress.com THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: With Onam around the corner, the flow of adulterated milk and coconut oil to Kerala has increased raising serious concern about the quality of the products sold in the market. Recently, Kerafed has raised a complaint with the Commissionerate of Food Safety Department seeking its intervention to prevent the flow of adulterated coconut oil brought in tankers from Tamil Nadu and other states.
The food safety authorities have decided to step up surveillance at check posts to screen the flow of coconut oil and milk from other states. Recently, the Dairy Development Department seized a tanker carrying 12,750 litres of urea-mixed milk. The managing director of Kerafed, in a complaint submitted to the food safety department, has urged the department to step up surveillance and do more quality checking to curb the sale of adulterated coconut oil.
Many adulterated coconut oil brands with names similar to ‘Kera’ — the coconut oil brand of Kerafed — are being sold in the state. Previously, the Food Safety Department banned around 166 coconut oil brands which were sub-standard and adulterated. Kerafed alleged that adulterated coconut oils are being sold at a reduced rate. While Kerafed is selling coconut oil at `180, some of the oil brands are selling their product between `30 and `40.
The food safety authorities are planning for special drives ahead of Onam from August 29. “Special squads have been formed to ensure the quality of food products sold in the market during Onam. The squads have collected around 140 surveillance samples so far,” an official of the Food Safety Department. coconut oil adulteration substandard unknown ban on 166 coconut oil brands special drives alleged Kerala, India milk fflo:hasAdulterant urea seized a tanker carrying 12,750 litres of urea-mixed milk seizure of urea-mixed milk fflo:issuedBy Dairy Development Department Dairy Development Department seized a tanker carrying 12,750 litres of urea-mixed milk ban on 166 coconut oil brands fflo:issuedBy Food Safety Department Food Safety Department banned around 166 coconut oil brands adulterated coconut oil finding fflo:inRegion Kerala adulterated coconut oil floods Kerala market transport of adulterated coconut oil fflo:occursAt Distribution adulterated coconut oil brought in tankers from Tamil Nadu77:Tc50,Over 4,000 litre of adulterated oil seized from Chennai store indianexpress.com Over 4,000 litre of adulterated oil seized from Chennai store
The officials noted that they have sent the samples of the oil to the laboratory. Further action will be taken depending on the result, the officials said.
Food safety department officials Tuesday raided a wholesale store near Saidapet in Chennai and seized around 4,400 litre of adulterated oil. The officials noted that the shop owners had been illegally storing the oil underground and selling it to the customers.
“The oil that we seized today was contaminated with mud and dust; it was totally unhygienic. We should never consume such oil.
The shop does not have a licence to store such a huge quantity of oil. Though it looks like a small shop from outside, they have a space underground where they had stored this oil in a sump. Everyday several barrels of oil were brought here in trucks and deposited in the sump. They have a huge tank on the top floor. They used to pump the oil from the sump using a motor. It is a crime to sell oil without any package, label, ISI mark, the address of the company, or the manufacturing date, etc. I urge the retailers not to sell oil on loose. We will initiate action against such shops,” Dr Satheesh Kumar, designated food safety officer in Chennai, told the reporters.
The shop was sealed and a notice issued to the owner. The officials noted that they have sent the samples of the oil to the laboratory. Further action will be taken depending on the result, the officials said.
When asked about the wrong practices followed by the eating outlets in Chennai, the officer has urged the owners of fast-food eateries to desist from serving meat delicacies which have been marinated and stored for over two days. He also asked the public not to consume food with artificial colours.
He said apart from the permissible amount of food colour, the fast foods should not add any other colour to make the dish look appealing to the customers. “Re-cooked oil is not allowed at all,” he said.
Commenting on the ‘shawarma’ controversy, Dr Satheesh Kumar said that the Arabic dish ‘shawarma’ is good food if it is prepared, stored and heated properly.
(Any complaint from the public regarding hygiene and food quality can be informed to the officials at their WhatsApp number 9444042322) oil adulteration contamination mud dust seizure sealing notice issued suspected Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India oil fflo:hasAdulterant mud oil that we seized today was contaminated with mud oil fflo:hasAdulterant dust oil that we seized today was contaminated with mud and dust oil fflo:belongsToCategory Oils seized around 4,400 litre of adulterated oil adulterated oil seizure fflo:foundAtStep wholesale store raided a wholesale store near Saidapet in Chennai and seized around 4,400 litre of adulterated oil oil fflo:foundAtStep underground storage illegally storing the oil underground selling without package or label fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling sell oil without any package, label, ISI mark, the address of the company oil fflo:foundAt Chennai seized from Chennai store78:T4ee,Loose Cooking Oil Seized, Fir Lodged Against Proprietor | Indore News - Times of India indiatimes.com INDORE: Indore district administration on Wednesday collected samples of cooking oil from a wholesale shop and seized soyabean oil worth Rs 34,500 on suspicion adulteration.
Acting on a complaint, collector 
Manish Singh and ADM Abhay Bedekar had instructed food safety department to carry out an inspection at M/S Sangeeta Traders in Tigariya. âIn the inspection, the team found sale, packing and storage of the cooking oil,â the ADM said, adding that the team collected five samples of loose cooking oil and seized 247 kg of cooking oil worth Rs 34,580.
Bedekar said that the oil was seized on suspicion of adulteration.
An FIR has been lodged against proprietor Jinendra Jain. soyabean oil cooking oil adulteration seizure FIR lodged suspected Indore, Madhya Pradesh, India AdulterationAct at M/S Sangeeta Traders prov:wasAssociatedWith M/S Sangeeta Traders inspection at M/S Sangeeta Traders soyabean oil fflo:belongsToCategory Oils seized soyabean oil loose cooking oil fflo:belongsToCategory Oils samples of loose cooking oil Seizure of soyabean oil at M/S Sangeeta Traders fflo:foundAtStep Retail collected samples of cooking oil from a wholesale shop79:T19ce,Alcohol poisoning and edible oil fraud cases soar in India foodnavigator-asia.com India has been a hotspot for food and beverage adulteration cases over the past several years, covering a wide range of products from dairy to honey and more – and after the COVID-19 pandemic hit the region, alcohol emerged as the most vulnerable sector for counterfeits due to high demand and low enforcement, a situation that has not abated since its spike was detected last year.
“In India, alcohol is particularly prone to being targeted for counterfeits – both cheap and branded types of alcohols are always in high demand [and] the unique situation that the COVID-19 crisis created [resulted] in a mismatch of demand and supply,” Authentication Solution Providers’ Association (ASPA) Secretary Chander Shekhar Jeena told FoodNavigator-Asia.
“Criminals have exploited this situation to make and sell illicit liquor [and they were enabled] because the high profit margins were attractive whilst the lack of evidence and penalisation was encouraging.”
Alcohol was identified in the ASPA State of Counterfeiting in India 2021 report as the most-counterfeited sector - and this situation appears to have continued on into 2022, with last seven days of July 2022 (23rd to 31st) alone having seen at least five large-scale fake alcohol operations rounded up all over the country.
Even more worryingly, a series of alcohol poisonings due to the consumption of counterfeit alcohol has also been taking place in multiple state – one of the most tragic saw 28 deaths across multiple villages in the state of Gujarat attributed to fake alcohol, with several dozen more hospitalised. At present, Gujarat enforces a complete ban on the purchase, consumption and possession of alcohol, a likely catalyst for the fake alcohol business.
In addition, the last two weeks of July 2022 also saw at least three adulterated oil rings busted in multiple Indian states including Rajasthan and Jharkhand, with thousands of litres of edible oil being confiscated.
Along with the adulterated oil, many cans, boxes and packaging materials with branded company names were also recovered, indicating that the majority of this oil had been destined to be packed as branded products and sent to local retailers and distributors to be sold for consumer consumption.
To prevent situations such as these from repeating themselves, ASPA has urged both industry and government to look more closely at implementing better anti-counterfeit strategies, particularly those with technological safeguards.
“As we move forward in the technology-enabled era, it is time that India also employs intelligent technology to solve the problems of counterfeiting that is damaging the economy from the inside,” ASPA President Nakul Pasricha said.
“The circulation of substandard and falsified products [such] as fake alcohol and adulterated dairy [attacks the public] on multiple levels – by threatening human and animal well-being, hampering brand profits, obstructing government revenues, robbing consumer faith and damaging brand India in the global market.
“We are seeing steps taken towards tackling counterfeiting in India e.g. in the pharmaceutical sector which has mandated 300 top brands to use QR codes on their packaging – [but] even these have not yet made their way into the food and beverage sector at full scale yet.
“[From a broader point of view, these are still small steps while the problem is much more complex - A strategic all-around plan and actions are required to curb the massive menace of counterfeiting in the country, utilising authentication solutions and robust track and trace infrastructure."
Technology is the answer
Although many Indian food and beverage are not yet seeing investments into anti-counterfeiting technology as a main priority, Pasricha stressed that it is wise to do this to put Indian F&B on the international map.
“The return on investment on authentication solutions is very significant, and other countries' positive impact of using the anti-counterfeit solutions has been proven, [so] we are confident that India will adopt this too,” he said.
“ASPA is in fact rolling out our five-year strategy to push national authentication and traceability forward, and within these we intend to focus on areas such as advancing R&D, increasing the awareness of Authentication and Traceability solutions (ATS) and promoting further adoption, as well as developing tools to measure the impact and scale of counterfeiting [both locally and internationally].
“This strategy will cover 2022 to 2027, and within this India is our first target to push more of these authentication and traceability technologies, as [we see that] counterfeiting is eroding over INR1tn (US$12.8bn) in the Indian economy, and these are essential tools for India to fight back.”
Pasricha also stressed that the although adulteration issues have ‘seeped deep into the ecosystem’ within India’s food and beverage industry, the magnitude of the issue is in face ‘still underestimated and undertreated’, urging for the fostering of better consumer behaviour, better brand practices, and better sensitisation on the part of regulatory bodies to make a ‘considerable dent’ in the nation’s adulteration issue. edible oil adulteration counterfeit adulterated oil confiscation alleged Rajasthan, India fake alcohol fflo:commonIn Gujarat 28 deaths across multiple villages in the state of Gujarat attributed to fake alcohol adulterated oil fflo:commonIn Rajasthan adulterated oil rings busted in multiple Indian states including Rajasthan alcohol fflo:commonIn India In India, alcohol is particularly prone to being targeted for counterfeits alcohol fflo:hasFraudType Counterfeiting alcohol emerged as the most vulnerable sector for counterfeits alcohol fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional Criminals have exploited this situation to make and sell illicit liquor fake alcohol fflo:causesEffect alcohol poisoning alcohol poisonings due to the consumption of counterfeit alcohol adulterated oil fflo:commonIn Jharkhand adulterated oil rings busted in multiple Indian states including ... Jharkhand adulterated oil fflo:foundAt Distribution sent to local retailers and distributors ASPA five-year strategy fflo:appliesTo India within this India is our first target ASPA five-year strategy fflo:hasDefinition advancing R&D, increasing awareness of ATS, promoting adoption, developing tools to measure impact focus on areas such as advancing R&D, increasing the awareness of Authentication and Traceability solutions7a:Tec4,Ganj Basoda: Adulterated Oil surfaces in markets ahead of the festival season freepressjournal.in Ganj Basoda (Madhya Pradesh): As the festival season is round the corner, the use of low quality and adulterated edible oils has again taken over in the eateries situated in several rural areas of the Ganjbasoda district, such as Udaipur, Ghatera, Bareth, Pathari and Tyonda to name a few.
The situation has exacerbated due to the laxity of the food and drug department, which has given tacit approval to the shop owners and restaurant proprietors to trade low quality and adulterated oils.
The illegal supply and trade of the adulterated oil is ongoing in full swing at scores of places of the said rural areas, where the adulterated oil is being deceitfully sold as high quality oil by packaging it into plastic bottles and placing the sticker of the branded oils on it. Thereafter, the oil is sold to the consumers.
Despite the implementation of the Food Safety and Security Act, which attracts a fine and a provision of imprisonment, the illegal practice of mixing adulterated oil with branded Palm oil is in force. Note worthily, the rates of edible oil have been soaring lately, which have put the poor in a tight spot. Forced due to financial constraints, the poor are compelled to buy cheap quality oil, which in turn proves fatal for their health.
On the condition of anonymity, an employee of the food and drug department shed light on the issue. He stated that purchasing branded edible oils is too heavy on the general public's pocket. Thus, the people have resorted to buying cheap quality oils.
'This is also in the knowledge of the food department personnel, who are silent on the issue, as the general public's health is of no concern to them', he added. edible oil adulteration substitution mislabeling adulterated oil alleged Ganj Basoda, Madhya Pradesh, India adulterated oil fflo:commonIn Udaipur adulterated edible oils has again taken over in the eateries situated in several rural areas of the Ganjbasoda district, such as Udaipur adulterated oil fflo:commonIn Ghatera adulterated edible oils has again taken over in the eateries situated in several rural areas of the Ganjbasoda district, such as Udaipur, Ghatera adulterated oil fflo:commonIn Bareth adulterated edible oils has again taken over in the eateries situated in several rural areas of the Ganjbasoda district, such as Udaipur, Ghatera, Bareth adulterated oil fflo:commonIn Tyonda adulterated edible oils has again taken over in the eateries situated in several rural areas of the Ganjbasoda district, such as Udaipur, Ghatera, Bareth, Pathari and Tyonda adulterated oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod mixing adulterated oil with branded Palm oil illegal practice of mixing adulterated oil with branded Palm oil adulterated oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod packaging it into plastic bottles and placing the sticker of the branded oils on it the adulterated oil is being deceitfully sold as high quality oil by packaging it into plastic bottles and placing the sticker of the branded oils on it adulterated edible oil fflo:commonIn Ganj Basoda adulterated edible oils has again taken over in the eateries situated in several rural areas of the Ganjbasoda district Adulterated oil found in Ganj Basoda fflo:inRegion Ganj Basoda adulterated edible oils has again taken over in the eateries situated in several rural areas of the Ganjbasoda district packaging it into plastic bottles and placing the sticker of the branded oils on it fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling deceitfully sold as high quality oil by packaging it into plastic bottles and placing the sticker of the branded oils on it adulterated oil fflo:causesEffect fatal for their health cheap quality oil, which in turn proves fatal for their health7b:T676,Khargone: Edible oil worth Rs 50 lakh seized freepressjournal.in Khargone (Madhya Pradesh): In a major crackdown on those involved in hoarding, a joint team of five departments led by deputy collector Omnarayan Singh conducted raids at shops and godowns of Gurukrupa Traders Bistan road and seized edible oil worth Rs 50,11,174. Officials involved in the raid admitted that this is the biggest action on a single establishment in the district so far.
Revenue, Mandi, Weights and Measures, Labour, Food Security and Food Supply departments were involved in the raid conducted on the directions of district collector Kumar Purushottam.
Besides edible oil, the team also found 135.69 quintals of illegal wheat. Whereas it is suspected that 1774 quintals of wheat have been stored without permission.
Deputy collector Singh said that business is allowed, but there is doubt on the permission to store.
During the investigation, it came to light that the repacking of oil is also done by the traders. Not only this, three weighing machines were not found to be verified in the investigation done by the Measurement Department. Apart from this, MRP has also been tampered with on five oil cans of 15 litres each.
During this action deputy collector Singh, food supply officer Manohar Thakur, assistant food inspector Bharat Jamre, food safety officer RR Solanki, HL Avasya, RR Solanki, measurement officer Pathak, labour officer Shailendra Solanki and their teams were present. edible oil mislabeling unsafe_food seizure raid suspected Khargone, Madhya Pradesh, India MRP tampering fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling MRP has also been tampered with on five oil cans7c:Tc72,tinsukia police: Tinsukia Police Bust Oil Adulteration Racket Arrest 4, One On The Run indiatimes.com DIBRUGARH: Blowing the lid off a thriving adulterated oil racket in upper 
Assam, Tinsukia Police on Saturday arrested four persons and seized 14,000 litres of stolen condensate oil from Tinsukia and Dibrugarh districts. 
Tinsukia DSP Hiranya Kumar Borah, who led the operation, said based on information from Oil India Limited (OIL) security team, a raid was conducted in Tinsukia town which led to the recovery of 6,000 litres of stolen condensate oil from two vehicles, a dump truck and a winger passenger vehicle.
The oil, which was pilfered from pipelines, were kept in containers of 200 litres each. 
“We arrested the drivers of the two vehicles who told us that the stolen oil was supposed to be taken to RD Dhaba which is located beside NH-37 in the Chabua area of Dibrugarh district. We also came to know that the adulteration of oil was being carried out from a barricaded godown located behind the dhaba,” the DSP said. 
He added, “The gang, in connivance with the tanker drivers, used to take out certain amount of oil (diesel or petrol) from the tankers and replace it with cheap condensate oil. The tankers transport oil from the Indian Oil Corporation (IOC) plant in Digboi to various locations of the northeast. We raided the dhaba and the godown and seized 8,000 litres of oil which were stolen from oil tankers.” 
The DSP further said, “We also found chemicals like nitric acid and some powdered substances, which were used for adulterating oil. The owner of the dhaba, Rubul Dhuliya, who is the kingpin of the racket, is absconding. However, we have arrested two of the gang members.” 
Sources said the illegal oil theft and adulteration racket has been flourishing in the oil-rich districts of Tinsukia and Dibrugarh since last few years. The dhabas or roadside eateries along the NH-37, particularly in the 77-km stretch from Chabua (Dibrugarh district) to Sepon (Sivasagar district), are said to be the flashpoint of the illegal trade involving lakhs of rupees. condensate oil adulteration substitution condensate oil arrest seizure suspected Tinsukia, Assam, India condensate oil fflo:commonIn Dibrugarh seized 14,000 litres of stolen condensate oil from Tinsukia and Dibrugarh districts condensate oil fflo:foundAt RD Dhaba adulteration of oil was being carried out from a barricaded godown located behind the dhaba condensate oil fflo:foundAt barricaded godown behind RD Dhaba adulteration of oil was being carried out from a barricaded godown Replacing diesel or petrol with condensate oil fflo:hasFraudType Substitution replace it with cheap condensate oil oil adulteration racket prov:wasAssociatedWith Rubul Dhuliya owner of the dhaba, Rubul Dhuliya, who is the kingpin of the racket nitric acid fflo:commonIn Tinsukia racket has been flourishing in the oil-rich districts of Tinsukia nitric acid fflo:commonIn Dibrugarh racket has been flourishing in the oil-rich districts of Tinsukia and Dibrugarh illegal oil theft and adulteration racket fflo:commonIn Tinsukia and Dibrugarh flourishing in the oil-rich districts of Tinsukia and Dibrugarh7d:Tc42,Oil’s not well? Food safety teams smell fraud thehindu.com The Russia-Ukraine war has driven up the price of edible oil in India. Suspecting that the price rise may lead to sale of adulterated or substandard edible oil, Telangana Food Safety Authority teams conducted checks at oil manufacturing units, packaging units and retail stores in the State, and collected 98 samples.
C. Sivaleela, director of the Food Safety department, which comes under Institute of Preventive Medicine, said that their teams collected edible oil samples over three days and those have been sent to the State Food Laboratory in Nacharam.
The tests are conducted to determine the acid value of oil and nature of oil among other factors. The acid value increases with age of oil. This factor is being tested based on suspicion that old oil is being packed and sold as new product.
The nature of oil is checked to find out if any oil other than those mentioned on the label has been mixed. The lab analysis will also show if the oil mentioned on the label matches the contents inside the packet.
Senior scientific officer at the State Food Laboratory, G. Laxmi Narayana Reddy said it takes 14 days to receive results. “We received the samples a few days ago. Reports will be available in 10-12 days,” said Dr. Laxmi Narayana.
“The MRP of a litre of sunflower oil was ₹155. Now the price has shot up to around ₹200,” said P. Sunil Kumar, a consumer.
Dr Sivaleela said their teams have been checking the quality of various food products. Anything that is consumed comes under the category of food — milk, bread, cake, raw materials like pulses, and fruit juices. Even packaged water and alcoholic beverages fall under the category of food.
Published - April 04, 2022 11:33 pm IST edible oil adulteration substitution old oil sampling suspected Telangana, India old oil fflo:isSubstituteFor new product suspicion that old oil is being packed and sold as new product milk fflo:belongsToCategory food Anything that is consumed comes under the category of food — milk bread fflo:belongsToCategory food category of food — milk, bread cake fflo:belongsToCategory food Anything that is consumed comes under the category of food — milk, bread, cake, raw materials like pulses, and fruit juices. pulses fflo:belongsToCategory food raw materials like pulses, and fruit juices. Even packaged water and alcoholic beverages fall under the category of food. fruit juices fflo:belongsToCategory food Anything that is consumed comes under the category of food — milk, bread, cake, raw materials like pulses, and fruit juices. packaged water fflo:belongsToCategory food Even packaged water and alcoholic beverages fall under the category of food alcoholic beverages fflo:belongsToCategory food and alcoholic beverages fall under the category of food Edible oil analysis fso:isPerformedAt State Food Laboratory in Nacharam sent to the State Food Laboratory in Nacharam oil quality analysis fso:isPerformedAt State Food Laboratory Senior scientific officer at the State Food Laboratory sunflower oil fflo:belongsToCategory food MRP of a litre of sunflower oil7e:T6ba,Vigilance Continues Raids, Monitors Edible Oil Trade | Vijayawada News - Times of India indiatimes.com Vijayawada: Vigilance and enforcement department additional director general Dr. S Bagchi said they are continuously monitoring the sale of edible oil considering the shortage due to the war in Ukraine. He said strict action will be taken to control black market in oil sale.
Addressing a media conference here on Sunday, Bagchi said the Ukraine war has affected the supply of cooking oils.
He said vigilance conducted searches at 1,890 places in the state and registered 59 cases against traders for violation of guidelines. 
âWe have identified that a few traders are selling spurious oil and some traders are tampering with the quantity and quality. A few traders are selling for more than MRP. We are acting firm on such traders and registering cases,â Bagchi said. âWe have registered eight criminal cases against traders who are selling adulterated oil,â he added.
The legal metrology department has filed 889 cases for violation of weights and measures act.
Bagchi added that the focus will be on oil traders. edible oil adulteration substandard spurious oil registration of criminal cases alleged Vijayawada, Krishna, Andhra Pradesh, India selling spurious oil prov:wasAssociatedWith oil traders traders are selling spurious oil adulteration of oil prov:wasAssociatedWith oil traders registered eight criminal cases against traders who are selling adulterated oil registration of 8 criminal cases fflo:issuedBy Vigilance and enforcement department registered eight criminal cases against traders filing of 889 cases fflo:issuedBy Legal metrology department The legal metrology department has filed 889 cases7f:T9f0,Visakhapatnam: Traders find new ways to strike a deal thehansindia.com Visakhapatnam: With officials giving clear instructions not to sell edible oils above than the MRP (maximum retail price), wholesale dealers are looking for newer ways to hoodwink the officials and strike a deal. To make this a reality, traders try to take advantage of the impact of the ongoing Russia-Ukraine war. In addition to hoarding a huge stock of oils in the godowns and create an artificial demand, the traders indulge in tampering with MRP stickers as well.
To keep a check on this, Vigilance and Enforcement officials conducted raids with the coordination of Legal Metrology officers at various gowdowns across the district. A large quantity of oils was seized by the authorities in the past few weeks. But with the MRP stickers being tampered, the officials concerned have intensified their raids and identified the malpractice in the traders' godowns at Kanithi Road in Gajuwaka. On Friday alone, Vigilance officers raided 16 outlets and wholesale dealers and filed nine cases against the violators.  
As a part of their raids, officials noticed that stocks were not only hoarded but the MRP stickers were also tampered at Gayatri Traders at Gajuwaka Kanithi Road. Vigilance and Enforcement ASP G Swaroopa Rani mentioned 60 tonnes of oils were seized from the godown and their MRPs were also found to be tampered. Similarly, the MRP of a 15-litre edible oil tin was replaced with Rs 3,090 label instead of its original cost Rs 2,590. Also, the manufacturing date was found to be altered. The ASP warned that the raids would continue and stringent action would be taken against the violators if they try to create artificial shortage of cooking oils or any commodity. edible oil mislabeling raid seizure case_filed suspected Visakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh, India edible oil fflo:belongsToCategory Oils 15-litre edible oil tin wholesale dealers prov:wasAssociatedWith MRP sticker tampering traders indulge in tampering with MRP stickers MRP sticker tampering fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling tampering with MRP stickers MRP sticker tampering fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional traders try to take advantage raids on godowns fflo:targets edible oils A large quantity of oils was seized MRP sticker tampering fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling MRP stickers were also tampered manufacturing date alteration prov:used edible oil manufacturing date was found to be altered manufacturing date alteration fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling manufacturing date was found to be altered80:Tc6d,Suspected adulterated oil thehindu.com Officials of the Food Safety Department have lifted samples of suspected adulterated groundnut and gingelly oil from a manufacturing-cum-packaging unit at Woraiyur in the city.
Following inspection carried out by a team of Food Safety officials, led by R. Ramesh Babu, Designated Officer, Food Safety and Drug Administration, at the unit on Tuesday, a stop sale order was issued on a consignment of about 1,150 litres of the two edible oil varieties. They were kept in a separate room and sealed pending further action based on test results.
According to the officials, the modus operandi was to mix palm oil with groundnut oil and rice bran oil with gingelly oil. The oils were procured from different vendors and mixed and packaged at the unit, before being marketed under a brand name. Once the lab test results were obtained, further action would be taken.
Dr. Ramesh Babu, while appealing to manufacturers and packaging units to avoid adulteration, said violations would attract stern action under the Food Safety and Standards Act 2006. In case of suspected adulteration, consumers could alert the department officials.
He indicated that the department would continue similar checks against oil manufacturing and packaging units.
On Monday, officials of the department issued a stop sale order on about 4,400 bottles of a soft drink made by a manufacturing unit at Olaiyur. The manufacturing and expiry dates on the bottles were printed using “erasable ink.” The tactic was apparently being resorted to by the manufacturer so as to easily recycle the used glass bottles, the officials said.
A notice stating that the manufacturing and expiry dates be printed with indelible ink had been issued to the owner. Similar action was taken against another unit at Somarasampettai near the city a few days ago, Dr. Ramesh Babu added.
Published - March 02, 2022 06:10 pm IST groundnut oil gingelly oil adulteration substitution dilution palm oil rice bran oil stop sale order suspected Woraiyur, India groundnut oil fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil mix palm oil with groundnut oil gingelly oil fflo:hasAdulterant rice bran oil mix palm oil with groundnut oil and rice bran oil with gingelly oil palm oil fflo:isSubstituteFor groundnut oil mix palm oil with groundnut oil rice bran oil fflo:isSubstituteFor gingelly oil mix palm oil with groundnut oil and rice bran oil with gingelly oil stop sale order fflo:targets soft drink issued a stop sale order on about 4,400 bottles of a soft drink groundnut oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod mixing palm oil modus operandi was to mix palm oil with groundnut oil gingelly oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod mixing rice bran oil with gingelly oil mix rice bran oil with gingelly oil mixing palm oil fflo:hasFraudType Dilution mix palm oil with groundnut oil mixing rice bran oil with gingelly oil fflo:hasFraudType Dilution mix rice bran oil with gingelly oil suspected adulterated groundnut oil finding fflo:foundAtStep Processing lifted samples of suspected adulterated groundnut and gingelly oil from a manufacturing-cum-packaging unit gingelly oil fflo:foundAtStep Processing manufacturing-cum-packaging unit81:T4dc,Maha govt, FDA crack down on oil manufacturers to check on adulteration indiatimes.com The state department had raided a factory in Vashi area of Navi Mumbai on Tuesday, while the FDA conducted operations at units in Bhiwandi and Mira Road, the official said.
The raids were conducted based on information about adulteration of sunflower oil, which was allegedly being mixed with palm oil and sold in Mumbai and parts of Maharashtra such as Panvel, Alibaug, Raigad, among others, said Kamlesh D Kedare of the Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Protection Department.
(Catch all the Business News, Breaking News and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)
Subscribe to The Economic Times Prime and read the ET ePaper online.
(Catch all the Business News, Breaking News and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)
Subscribe to The Economic Times Prime and read the ET ePaper online. sunflower oil palm oil adulteration substitution palm oil raid suspected Mumbai, Navi Mumbai, Maharashtra, India sunflower oil fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil adulteration of sunflower oil, which was allegedly being mixed with palm oil palm oil fflo:commonIn Panvel allegedly being mixed with palm oil and sold in Mumbai and parts of Maharashtra such as Panvel82:T1833,185 spurious mustard oil cans seized in Burrabazar | Kolkata News - Times of India indiatimes.com KOLKATA: The enforcement branch has raided the premises of three edible oil traders in the Posta region after receiving complaints that they were blending rice bran oil with deadly dyes and chemicals and repacking them as mustard oil and selling them at Rs 160 per litre, almost Rs 30-Rs 60 less than the market rate. The government has banned blending of mustard oil since July earlier this year.
The EB have seized huge stocks of adulterated mustard oil from three godowns in Burrabazar.
The adulteration was being carried out at special anti-chambers set up inside the godown, suspect investigators. âWe have collected the samples and sent them for testing. The accused wanted to cash in on the mustard oil price rise and were making a nice profit by using sub-standard products,â said Bidisha Kalita, DC (EB).
According to police, it was around two days back that officers from the enforcement branch carried out a special drive against blended mustard oil based on inputs from various sources. âSamples from each accused were collected after we came to know that they were selling adulterated oil at anywhere between Rs 160-Rs 165 per litre, which is not possible at present market rates if it was pure. We even found underground chambers at each godown. We suspect that mustard oil was adulterated by the accused by mixing essence, colour and low-rate-low-quality rice bran oil. This is subject to the chemical report that we are waiting for. We believe this oil was sold in bulk in the open market,â said an officer.
âOfficers from our food & edible oil section reached godowns at Strand Road where search and seizure were made at three shops and office-cum-godowns. We detained one Bikram Goel (45). As many as 105 tins filled with loose mustard oil (each tin 15 kgs) and 32 empty tins were seized from him. We also detained one Bidyut Nandi (42) and seized 35 tins filled with loose mustard oil and 15 empty tins. Manik Porel(55) was the third person to be detained. We detained 45 tins filled with loose mustard oil and 12 empty tins from Porel,â said Kalita.
The development comes at a time when the central government announced in October that it will push for more domestic rice bran oil production to counter the inflation in edible oil prices across the country. The country is witnessing record-high inflation in food prices, including in edible oils, pulses, meat and eggs, in addition to skyrocketing fuel prices. 
According to multiple studies in Kolkata, the commonly found adulterants from the chemical analysis of edible oil were found to be argemone oil, mineral oil, karanja oil and cyanide. The level of adulteration was found to be higher in unpackaged samples of mustard and soybean oil and absent in coconut oil.
Studies have also stated that adulteration was commonly practised in non-branded foods. âIncrease in consumer awareness would enable careful selection of ingredients, thereby further aiding in maintenance of good health,â a study titled âAdulteration in commonly used cooking oils of Kolkata: Evaluation of consumer perception and detection of adulterantsâ and published at the International Journal of Health Sciences & Research has recently stated. mustard oil adulteration substitution rice bran oil raid seizure detention suspected Kolkata, West Bengal, India mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant rice bran oil blending rice bran oil with deadly dyes and chemicals and repacking them as mustard oil rice bran oil fflo:isSubstituteFor mustard oil blending rice bran oil with deadly dyes and chemicals and repacking them as mustard oil mustard oil fflo:belongsToCategory Oils mustard oil argemone oil fflo:commonIn Kolkata According to multiple studies in Kolkata, the commonly found adulterants from the chemical analysis of edible oil were found to be argemone oil mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant dyes blending rice bran oil with deadly dyes and chemicals mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant chemicals blending rice bran oil with deadly dyes and chemicals blending rice bran oil with deadly dyes and chemicals prov:wasAssociatedWith edible oil traders blending rice bran oil with deadly dyes and chemicals blending rice bran oil with deadly dyes and chemicals fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional accused wanted to cash in on the mustard oil price rise mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod blending rice bran oil with dyes and chemicals blending rice bran oil with deadly dyes and chemicals blending rice bran oil with deadly dyes and chemicals fflo:hasFraudType Substitution blending rice bran oil with deadly dyes and chemicals mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant rice bran oil mixing essence, colour and low-rate-low-quality rice bran oil mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant essence mixing essence, colour and low-rate-low-quality rice bran oil mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant colour mixing essence, colour and low-rate-low-quality rice bran oil adulteration of mustard oil prov:wasAssociatedWith Bidyut Nandi We also detained one Bidyut Nandi (42) and seized 35 tins filled with loose mustard oil adulteration of mustard oil prov:wasAssociatedWith Manik Porel Manik Porel(55) was the third person to be detained mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant rice bran oil mixing essence, colour and low-rate-low-quality rice bran oil Adulterated mustard oil finding fflo:foundAtStep Retail search and seizure were made at three shops Adulterated mustard oil seizure fflo:foundAtStep Storage search and seizure were made at three shops and office-cum-godowns mineral oil fflo:commonIn Kolkata commonly found adulterants from the chemical analysis of edible oil were found to be argemone oil, mineral oil karanja oil fflo:commonIn Kolkata commonly found adulterants from the chemical analysis of edible oil were found to be argemone oil, mineral oil, karanja oil and cyanide cyanide fflo:commonIn Kolkata commonly found adulterants from the chemical analysis of edible oil were found to be argemone oil, mineral oil, karanja oil and cyanide soybean oil fflo:hasAdulterant argemone oil level of adulteration was found to be higher in unpackaged samples of mustard and soybean oil83:T77e,Tribunal slaps Rs 2 lakh fine on oil producer newindianexpress.com THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: The Food Safety Appellate Tribunal here has upheld the Rs 2-lakh fine that was imposed on a coconut oil manufacturer for selling substandard oil. The order was issued by judge S Sajikumar. The case pertaining to the verdict occurred in 2020 at Kunnathunadu panchayat in Ernakulam.
The oil sample collected from Kairali Traders by Food Safety Officer Neethu Nadir was found to be of low quality. A case was filed against Kairali Traders and Distributors Liya Traders before Muvattupuzha Adjudication Officer T Anil Kumar. Subsequently, Kairali Traders was ordered to pay a fine of Rs 2 lakh.
Kairali traders filed an appeal before the tribunal. The defence counsel argued that during the time of the offence, the licence of Kairali Traders was invalid and the samples were taken without following food safety rules.
Additional government pleader M Salahudeen, who appeared for the Food Safety Department countered this and argued that the company had a valid licence. coconut oil substandard Rs 2 lakh fine unclear Kunnathunadu panchayat, Ernakulam, Kerala, India IncidentFinding: Coconut Oil Substandard fflo:foundIn coconut oil coconut oil manufacturer for selling substandard oil IncidentFinding: Coconut Oil Substandard fflo:triggeredAction RegulatoryAction: Rs 2 lakh fine The Food Safety Appellate Tribunal here has upheld the Rs 2-lakh fine that was imposed on a coconut oil manufacturer for selling substandard oil RegulatoryAction: Rs 2 lakh fine fflo:issuedBy Food Safety Appellate Tribunal The Food Safety Appellate Tribunal here has upheld the Rs 2-lakh fine IncidentFinding: Coconut Oil Substandard fflo:inRegion Kunnathunadu panchayat case pertaining to the verdict occurred in 2020 at Kunnathunadu panchayat RegulatoryAction: Rs 2 lakh fine fflo:targets coconut oil fine that was imposed on a coconut oil manufacturer84:T64d,FDA urges caution while buying Diwali sweets indiatimes.com Kolhapur: The Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) has urged citizens to be on the alert while purchasing and consuming snacks and sweets during 
Diwali.The FDA said it would conduct a campaign against those found making or selling adulterated products.
On Monday, the FDA raided two shops in Sangli and seized items worth more than Rs2 lakh.“Stock worth Rs 1.7 lakh was seized from a shop at Madhavnagar in Sangli, while cooking oil worth Rs61, 950 was seized from the MIDC Kupwad area, under the Food Safety and Standards Act.
Further action will be taken once the report of the samples collected from these stores is received from the lab,” FDA assistant commissioner S A Chougule said.
He also advised against milk-based products from roadside vendors, and those kept in the open. Sweets made from khoya (mawa) should be consumed within 24 hours. Sweets should be consumed within 8-10 hours. If any fungus is found, then the item should not be consumed, he said.
“If people in Sangli want to lodge complaint about food quality, they can contact 0233-2602202/2602201. FDA will continue the campaign against food adulteration during Diwali,” he added. cooking oil adulteration substandard raid seizure suspected Sangli, Maharashtra, India Sweets fkg:hasIngredient khoya Sweets made from khoya (mawa) raid on two shops in Sangli fflo:issuedBy Food and Drugs Administration FDA raided two shops in Sangli lab analysis fso:isPerformedOn samples collected from these stores report of the samples collected from these stores is received from the lab85:T462,Indore: In ongoing war against adulteration, 3K lt edible oil seized from two units freepressjournal.in Indore
A joint team of Crime Branch and Food and Civil Supply department raided two oil packaging units in Palda area on suspicion that they were adulterating edibile oil. In all 3,000 litres of oil was seized from the two units.
The crime branch received a tip off that adulterated edibile was being supplied by M/s Atharva Enterprises and Chirag Enterprises. Both the units are owned by Manoj Jain.
The team also seized 294 litres of oil packets worth Rs 38,320.
Officials said that samples have been sent for examinationand if they are found to be adulterated, further action would be taken. edible oil adulteration raid seizure suspected Indore, Madhya Pradesh, India suspected adulteration of edible oil prov:wasAssociatedWith Manoj Jain Both the units are owned by Manoj Jain suspected adulteration of edible oil prov:wasAssociatedWith M/s Atharva Enterprises adulterated edibile was being supplied by M/s Atharva Enterprises examination fso:isPerformedOn edible oil sample samples have been sent for examination86:Tbc9,With pics - Arsh – FCS + FCS2 STRAP: Drive against ‘adulteration mafia’ in Indore: District FCS raids edible oil factory, petrol pump freepressjournal.in Indore: A team of the District Food and Civil Supply led by additional collector Abhay Bedekar, in a drive against ‘adulteration mafia’, conducted two drives in two areas under the Indore department jurisdiction on Saturday.
In one drive, conducted by the department along with the Crime Branch Department, over 3,550 litres of sub-standard oil was seized from the firm, Mamaji Industries, in the Palda area. The Crime Branch received a tip, following which the drive was conducted. In the drive, the operator of the industry, Ashok Agrawal, was found carrying out fraudulent activities by repackaging several types of oils in new bottles by adulterating the oil. The department took the samples of the oils and seized the entire material present in the factory.
Officials said they found that the company repackaged mustard, groundnut and soybean oil with its own brand, Morena Gold Kachi Ghani Oil, Active Live Soyabean Oil, Sun Active Sunflower Oil, Mamaji Groundnut Oil and Kathiabadi Groundnut. The repackaged oil packets were sent to dealers in Ujjain, Dewas, Khargone, Dhar and Indore.
In another drive, the team of the department raided Hans Travel’s petrol pump near Dhakkanwala Kuwa. The pump was selling biodiesel without permission. The team took samples of the petrol and diesel. Additional collector Bedekar said that a bio-diesel licence was required to carry out such activities. Action is being taken against those who are trading in it without a proper licence. Samples have been taken from the pump and action will be taken if issues were found with the samples.
Case registered against Go Gas owner
An FIR has been registered against four people in the Go Gas godown case in which gas was stored above the permissible quantity. The case has been registered against the agency’s territory manager, Ashok Soni, godown-in-charge Suraj Choudhary, godown keeper Lakhan and Sunil Solanki at the Rajendra Nagar police station. edible oil mustard oil groundnut oil soybean oil sunflower oil adulteration substandard mislabeling seizure raid suspected Indore, Madhya Pradesh, India Adulteration at Mamaji Industries prov:wasAssociatedWith Ashok Agrawal operator of the industry, Ashok Agrawal, was found carrying out fraudulent activities Adulteration at Mamaji Industries prov:used mustard oil repackaged mustard, groundnut and soybean oil Adulteration at Mamaji Industries prov:used groundnut oil repackaged mustard, groundnut and soybean oil Adulteration at Mamaji Industries prov:used soybean oil repackaged mustard, groundnut and soybean oil Adulteration at Mamaji Industries prov:used sunflower oil Sun Active Sunflower Oil Repackaging with adulteration fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling repackaging several types of oils in new bottles Repackaging with adulteration fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional carrying out fraudulent activities87:T8d3,Kurnool police arrest five member gang involved in selling fake oils and tea powders using fake labels of top FMCGs indiatimes.com TIRUPATI: Kurnool district police wing busted a five member gang involved in selling spurious products in large quantities using fake labels on Monday. The gang was involved in selling away fake coconut oils and tea powders using fake labels of top FMCGs. 
Briefing reporters about the arrests, Kurnool SP CH Sudheer Kumar Reddy said the key accused identified as Kamal Bhati, a resident of Kachiguda in Hyderabad along with his key aide identified as Sanjay of Moosapeta got into the business of selling fake coconut oils and tea powders using fake labels and identical packaging of top FMCGs. 
The duo who appointed distributors in the seven states of Andhra Pradesh, 
Telangana, 
Karnataka, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and Rajasthan, have been selling large quantities of fake coconut oils and tea powders to the public in these states. 
Following a complaint lodged by Soma Sundaram who is an authorized distributor for Marico's Parachute coconut oil at Bengaluru on August 27, the Nandikotkur police who took up a detailed investigation into the case arrested five persons including Kamal Bhati (46), Sanjay (40), D Satyanarayana (49), T Ravi Kumar (46), Sheik Khader Basha (46). 
Nandikotkur police seized 14880 fake coconut oil bottles, 5160 empty bottles, 1680 fake tea powder packets, 41400 empty tea powder packets along with various machinery and equipment. 
Police have registered a case under section 420 IPC and sec 51 (B) (1) R/W 63 of the Copyright Act of 1957 and Sec 103 and 104 of the Trademarks Act of 1999 r/w 34 IPC. coconut oil counterfeit mislabeling arrest seizure case registration alleged Kurnool, Andhra Pradesh, India fake coconut oil and tea powder sale prov:used coconut oil selling fake coconut oils and tea powders fake coconut oil and tea powder sale prov:used tea powder selling fake coconut oils and tea powders using fake labels fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling using fake labels of top FMCGs fake coconut oil and tea powder sale fflo:occursAt Distribution appointed distributors in the seven states case registration fflo:issuedBy Nandikotkur police Police have registered a case88:T546,Three of family die of dropsy over 10 days indiatimes.com Palanpur: Three out of seven members of a family who had suffered from food poisoning last month in Kundi village of Dhanera have died over the last 10 days, said medical officer of Banaskantha on Thursday.
Epidemic medical officer of Banaskantha, Dr N K Garg said that deaths were due to dropsy which was likely caused by consumption of adulterated mustard oil.
“One died on July 22, second death was on Tuesday and the third person succumbed on Wednesday,” Garg said.
The deceased have been identified as Chagan Paliwad (54), his son Naveen Paliwad (24) and daughter Daksha Paliwad (18).
Two of the deceased were admitted to a private hospital in Dhanera while one breathed his last in Palanpur. Four other members of the family are undergoing treatment in Ahmedabad and are said to be out of danger.
A team of Dharpur Medical College, Patan, had visited the family last month the food poisoning incident. mustard oil adulteration unsafe_food adulterated mustard oil suspected Palanpur, Banaskantha, Gujarat, India adulterated mustard oil fflo:causesEffect dropsy deaths were due to dropsy which was likely caused by consumption of adulterated mustard oil food poisoning incident fflo:inRegion Kundi village of Dhanera suffered from food poisoning last month in Kundi village of Dhanera89:T113c,Indore: Edible oil worth Rs 9.90L seized from Palda area, 11 samples taken from factory freepressjournal.in Indore: A team of food and drug administration department conducted a surprise inspection of an edible oil repacking factory in the Palda area on Friday and found that the FSSAI number of the oil, imported from Nepal, was incorrect. The team seized edible oil worth Rs 9.90L.
The drug administration team carried out a surprise inspection of the factory called Mahendra Brothers located in Palda area on Friday afternoon. The team members took 11 samples of various food items from the factory. One of the owners of the firm Mahesh Gulwani was also present on the spot when the team of officials reached there.
The samples of the oil taken include Gold Refined Soybean Oil 500ml, MP No. One Refined Soybean Oil 400ml, Flavour Gold Refined Soybean Oil 5 Litre, Flavour Gold Refined Soybean Oil 15 Litre, MP No. 1 Refined Sunflower Oil 15 Litre, Sagar Gold Refined Palmolein Oil 500ml,
Healthy King Refined Soybean Oil, Samples of Surya Coconut Oil, Halo Refined Sunflower Oil, Siddha Baba Refined Soyabean Oil and Halo Refined Soyabean Oil 15 KG. The samples were taken under Food Safety and Standards Act 2006.
Besides this, the team also confiscated Surya Coconut Oil 2205 kg, Halo Refined Sunflower Oil (1 lit pouch) 2000 lit., Halo Refined Soyabean Oil (15 lit tin) 2175 lit. The total value of the confiscated oil is estimated Rs 9,90,925. This action was also carried out under the Food Safety and Standards Act 2006. The confiscated items were kept in the custody of the firm itself. Surya Coconut Oil, Halo Refined Sunflower Oil, Siddha Baba Refined Soyabean Oil, Halo Refined Soyabean Oil 15 kg were found to be manufactured in Nepal and imported into the country. Interestingly the importer's license number was found to be in 12 digits, whereas the license issued by FSSAI New Delhi is a 14 digit number.
Indore: Edible oil worth Rs 9.90L seized from Palda area, 11 samples taken from factory
RECENT STORIES
                        
                            Train Update! Four West Central Railway Trains Diverted Due To Third Line Commissioning Work
                            
                                
                            
                        
                    
                        
                            One Exam, One Last Chance: 16.5k Madhya Pradesh Students To Take CBSE Supplementary Test On July 15
                            
                                
                            
                        
                    
                        
                            Malwa’s Famous Garadu And Sailana Balam Cucumber Earn GI Recognition
                            
                                
                            
                        
                    
                        
                            'To Hamari Banayi Sadak Par Mat Chalo,' Says Urban Minister Kailash Vijayvargiya Over 'Qafir' Remark...
                            
                                
                            
                        
                    
                        
                            President Draupadi Murmu Concludes Five-Day Madhya Pradesh Visit; Chief Minister Mohan Yadav Bids He... edible oil surya coconut oil halo refined sunflower oil halo refined soyabean oil siddha baba refined soyabean oil mislabeling substandard seizure inspection suspected Indore, Madhya Pradesh, India Gold Refined Soybean Oil fflo:belongsToCategory Edible Oils Gold Refined Soybean Oil 500ml MP No. One Refined Soybean Oil fflo:belongsToCategory Edible Oils MP No. One Refined Soybean Oil 400ml Flavour Gold Refined Soybean Oil fflo:belongsToCategory Edible Oils Flavour Gold Refined Soybean Oil 5 Litre MP No. 1 Refined Sunflower Oil fflo:belongsToCategory Edible Oils MP No. 1 Refined Sunflower Oil 15 Litre Sagar Gold Refined Palmolein Oil fflo:belongsToCategory Edible Oils Sagar Gold Refined Palmolein Oil 500ml Healthy King Refined Soybean Oil fflo:belongsToCategory Edible Oils Healthy King Refined Soybean Oil Surya Coconut Oil fflo:belongsToCategory Edible Oils Samples of Surya Coconut Oil Halo Refined Sunflower Oil fflo:belongsToCategory Edible Oils Halo Refined Sunflower Oil Surya Coconut Oil fflo:foundAtStep Import Surya Coconut Oil ... were found to be manufactured in Nepal and imported8a:Td07,Madhya Pradesh: Pulse mills, hotels and grocery shops inspected; samples collected for testing freepressjournal.in Guna: District administration Guna, a joint team of food and revenue department conducted raids on big hotels and factories of Guna city on Friday.
The team inspected Sanjay Dal Mill, Ved Dal Mill and Deepak Dal Mill in the industrial area and took samples dal for testing.
The team inspected Hotel Rajvilas, Hotel GK, and kitchen of Jain Garden and The Grand Kasturi and took samples of food items like paneer, soybean oil, flour for testing.
Another team of the fooda, municipality and revenue department conducted a drive in Aron Tehsil.
The team got the contaminated and expired food items from grocery shops, and destroyed them along with the and took samples of namkeen for investigation.
The team destroyed 41 packets of expired namkeen, 6 packets of toast, 7 packets of chilli powder, one packet of soybean oil were found at Banjhal grocery, 30 packets of namkeen found at RomilKirana, 10 packets of chilli powder, found at Nehru grocery, 10 packets of namkeen found at Roshan grocery and 25 packets of namkeen found at Mahavir grocery.
Food officer Manoj Raghuvanshi said that the packets of food items at these shops were found to have passed best before date.
Food traders were directed by the food safety officers to keep and sell high quality pure food items for human consumption. All the samples taken for testing have been sent to the food analyst, State Food Testing Laboratory, Bhopal. Further legal action will be taken on receipt of the reports.
‘Bad’ cooking oil destroyed
Barwani: A team of district Food and Drug Administration collected samples of food items from grocery shops and hotels in the Bus stand, Jhanda Chowk and Karanja area. Fifty one samples of pulses, cooking oil, and ground spices were tested at Food Testing Laboratory. The TPM value of cooking oil used in 02 hotels was found to be more than the standard level. It was destroyed on the spot. Food safety officer Pankaj Anchal said that the division level mobile food testing laboratory will visit in all the sub-divisions of the district. Its purpose is to provide information about the quality of the food items being used by the general public and shopkeepers and in case of shortage, issue correction notices to the shopkeepers and get the deficiencies removed. Food safety officer Pankaj Anchal, Velsingh Mori, Premlata Bhavar and lab technician Neeraj Prajapat were present. cooking oil substandard contamination total polar materials destroyed pending_test Barwani, Madhya Pradesh, India Testing of pulses, cooking oil, and ground spices fso:isPerformedAt Food Testing Laboratory Fifty one samples of pulses, cooking oil, and ground spices were tested at Food Testing Laboratory. chilli powder fflo:foundAt Nehru grocery 10 packets of chilli powder, found at Nehru grocery Analysis of food samples fso:isPerformedAt State Food Testing Laboratory, Bhopal All the samples taken for testing have been sent to the food analyst, State Food Testing Laboratory, Bhopal. cooking oil fflo:hasAdulterant high TPM The TPM value of cooking oil used in 02 hotels was found to be more than the standard level. high TPM fflo:foundAt Retail The TPM value of cooking oil used in 02 hotels was found to be more than the standard level.8b:T5ba,Epidemic dropsy claims two lives in Gujarat's Banaskantha indiatimes.com PALANPUR: Two women died and six others of their family fell ill reportedly after consuming adulterated mustard oil in Gundri village of Banaskantha’s Dantiwada taluka. 
 All of them are suspected to have suffered from epidemic dropsy, a clinical condition caused due to consumption of contaminated oil. 
According to epidemic medical officer N K Garg, one 22-year-old woman died on Tuesday while a 19-year-old succumbed on Thursday. 
Their blood samples have been sent to National Institute of Occupational Health (NIOH) in Ahmedabad for further investigation. A team of paramedical staff led by a medical officer has been camping in the village to strictly observe the possibility of further spread of disease. The affected people are being treated.
The oils are adulterated using argemone oil which contains toxic alkaloids sanguinarine and dihydrosanguinarine. Dropsy or oedema results in severe fluid retention in the body which causes diarrhoea and other complications. mustard oil adulteration contamination medical observation suspected Gundri, Banaskantha, Gujarat, India mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant argemone oil oils are adulterated using argemone oil epidemic dropsy fflo:hasDefinition severe fluid retention in the body which causes diarrhoea and other complications Dropsy or oedema results in severe fluid retention in the body which causes diarrhoea and other complications8c:T809,Nagpur: Adulterated edible oil racket busted, 3 booked | Nagpur News - Times of India indiatimes.com NAGPUR: Tehsil police on Tuesday busted an adulterated edible oil manufacturing unit and booked three persons in this connection. 
The cops led by senior PI Jayesh Bhandarkar also seized a huge quantity of adulterated oil being marketed by labelling it as a product by reputed brands.
During the raid, police found around 28 15-litre tins of impure edible oil, fake stickers and other material.
The police have booked three â Prem Gagwani (58, a resident of Badkas Chowk, Mahal), Shankar Durugkar (47, a resident of Hiwri Nagar) and Ashok Keswani (a resident of Ambedkar Chowk, Central Avenue) under sections 51, 52 A, 63, 68A of Copyright Act. 
Police said one Sanjay Tiwari, a resident of Rathod Layout, who is representative of a reputed edible oil company, received complaints regarding rampant sale of adulterated oil under his companyâs brand name. A 15-litre oil can was being sold for Rs2,600. 
Police said the fake unit used labels and logos of genuine products to deceive consumers. âThe accused used to offer hefty commission to the shops to sell the adulterated products,â police said.
Police are carrying out further investigations. edible oil adulteration counterfeit mislabeling impure edible oil booking of three persons seizure of adulterated oil alleged Nagpur, Maharashtra, India Adulterated edible oil manufacturing unit prov:used edible oil busted an adulterated edible oil manufacturing unit using labels and logos of genuine products fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling used labels and logos of genuine products to deceive consumers using fake labels and logos fflo:hasFraudType Substitution fake unit used labels and logos of genuine products to deceive consumers adulterated edible oil fflo:foundAt Processing busted an adulterated edible oil manufacturing unit busted adulterated edible oil manufacturing unit fflo:triggeredAction booking of three persons busted an adulterated edible oil manufacturing unit and booked three persons8d:Tb24,Patanjali mustard oil found to be of substandard food quality: Rajasthan govt indiatoday.in Patanjali mustard oil found to be of substandard food quality: Rajasthan govt
According to the Rajasthan government, mustard oil sold by Baba Ramdev's company Patanjali has been found to be substandard by the Food Safety and Standards Authority Laboratory in Alwar.
Mustard oil sold by Baba Ramdev’s company Patanjali has been found to be of substandard quality, the Rajasthan government claimed on Wednesday.
According to the state government, five samples of mustard oil supplied to Patanjali by Singhania oil mill were tested. All five samples failed. They were not of the required standard or quality.
Chief Medical Officer Dr Omprakash Meena stated that the food safety of the mustard oil pouches was tested in the presence of the local administration on May 27. The test report was produced by the Food Safety and Standards Authority Laboratory in Alwar.
ALSO READ: Plea in Bihar court seeks sedition case against Baba Ramdev
Meena said that Patanjali’s mustard oil pouch and mustard oil bottle were found to be substandard food items. Sri Sri Tattva brand’s mustard oil also got the same result.
Meanwhile, Parliament brand’s mustard oil was found to be a sub-standard and false food item.
Baba Ramdev’s Patanjali is yet to issue a statement on the issue.
Around two weeks ago, Alwar collectorate officials reportedly raided Singhania oil mill on the orders of Rajasthan Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot. Large quantities of Patanjali’s packing pouches and products were recovered and the mill was sealed.
ALSO READ: Nepal stops distribution of Coronil kits gifted by Patanjali, cites lack of proof on efficacy mustard oil substandard raid on Singhania oil mill alleged Alwar, Rajasthan, India Patanjali mustard oil substandard finding prov:wasAttributedTo Patanjali mustard oil sold by Baba Ramdev's company Patanjali has been found to be substandard Patanjali mustard oil substandard finding fflo:foundIn mustard oil mustard oil sold by Baba Ramdev's company Patanjali has been found to be substandard Patanjali mustard oil substandard finding fflo:inRegion Rajasthan According to the Rajasthan government, mustard oil sold by Baba Ramdev's company Patanjali has been found to be substandard raid on Singhania oil mill fflo:issuedBy Rajasthan Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot raided Singhania oil mill on the orders of Rajasthan Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot Patanjali mustard oil substandard finding fflo:supportedBy Food Safety and Standards Authority Laboratory in Alwar found to be substandard by the Food Safety and Standards Authority Laboratory in Alwar Patanjali mustard oil substandard finding prov:wasAttributedTo Singhania oil mill five samples of mustard oil supplied to Patanjali by Singhania oil mill were tested. All five samples failed8e:T5b8,Adulteration in edible oil detected  thehindu.com Food Safety officials on Thursday ordered a edible oil packaging unit at Sangilandapuram in the city to suspend operations after they detected a case of suspected adulteration.
The officials led by R. Ramesh Babu, Designated Officer, Food Safety and Drug Administration, Tiruchi, inspected the unit on Thursday when palm oil was found packaged as refined sunflower oil. About 5,000 litres of such oil was kept for sales. Samples were collected and sent for testing, Dr. Ramesh Babu said in a press release.
About 5,410 litres of edible oil meant for sales were seized and the unit was ordered to suspend operations, he said and added that those indulging in adulteration of edible oil would face stern action.
Complaints of adulteration can be lodged by dialling 9585959595/9944959595/9444042322, he said.
Published - April 22, 2021 07:47 pm IST refined sunflower oil palm oil adulteration substitution mislabeling palm oil suspend operations seizure suspected Tiruchi, Tamil Nadu, India palm oil fflo:isSubstituteFor refined sunflower oil palm oil was found packaged as refined sunflower oil refined sunflower oil fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil palm oil was found packaged as refined sunflower oil suspected adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith edible oil packaging unit at Sangilandapuram detected a case of suspected adulteration palm oil fflo:foundAt Processing palm oil was found packaged as refined sunflower oil8f:T69f,Adulteration found in paneer, mustard oil & honey in Doon | Dehradun News - Times of India indiatimes.com DEHRADUN: The district food and drug department on Monday received quality test reports of 19 food items, the samples of which were collected from the state capital in the last two months. According to the reports, adulteration was found in mustard oil, a brand of honey, pan masala, and paneer.
GC Kandwal, designated officer food safety, Dehradun, said that the sample of honey, which was found to be substandard, was collected during a special state-wide drive in October last year.
The rest of the food samples were collected in February and March 2021.
âAmong the 19 samples whose reports arrived on Monday, seven were found to be substandard. The adulterated products include a renowned brand of honey and four pan masalas,â said Kandwal.
The food and drug department will now be sending notices to seek explanations from the manufacturers of the products which were found substandard.
The official added that five samples of edible oil, 23 samples of milk and related products, six products of sweet, three cereal-based products, chips, spices and beverages were collected for quality testing. mustard oil adulteration unclear Dehradun, Uttarakhand, India mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant unspecified adulterant in mustard oil adulteration was found in mustard oil Adulteration in mustard oil fflo:foundAtStep Retail samples of which were collected from the state capital Adulteration in paneer fflo:foundAtStep Retail samples of which were collected from the state capital Adulteration in mustard oil fflo:inRegion Dehradun Adulteration found in paneer, mustard oil & honey in Doon90:T7b3,Mumbai: Over 50% edible oils seized in raids found non-certified freepressjournal.in More than 50 per cent of edible oils seized by the Food and Drug Administration in Thane and Mumbai during raids last month have been found to be non-certified, the FDA has said.
Raids were conducted on eight establishments of retail and wholesale merchants in Thane and neighbouring Mumbai on January 16, the FDA said in a release issued on Monday.
Edible oils, including mustard, peanut, sunflower and palm oil, worth Rs 4.98 crore were seized, it said.
Later, 93 samples were sent for testing, out of which 49 (or 52.6 per cent) were found to be non-certified, the release said.
The remaining stock which was certified by authorities concerned would be released for sale, while action would be taken against those selling non-certified oils, it said.
The FDA joint commissioners have been ordered to inspect the quality of various edible oils being stored and sold at outlets across the state, it added. mustard oil peanut oil sunflower oil palm oil substandard mislabeling seizure inspection pending_test Mumbai, Thane, Maharashtra, India mustard oil fflo:belongsToCategory Oils Edible oils, including mustard, peanut, sunflower and palm oil peanut oil fflo:belongsToCategory Oils Edible oils, including mustard, peanut, sunflower and palm oil sunflower oil fflo:belongsToCategory Oils Edible oils, including mustard, peanut, sunflower and palm oil palm oil fflo:belongsToCategory Oils Edible oils, including mustard, peanut, sunflower and palm oil Raids on edible oil establishments fflo:issuedBy Food and Drug Administration seized by the Food and Drug Administration in Thane and Mumbai during raids Non-certified edible oils finding fflo:foundAtStep Retail Raids were conducted on eight establishments of retail and wholesale merchants Non-certified edible oils finding fflo:foundAtStep Distribution Raids were conducted on eight establishments of retail and wholesale merchants91:T7a0,Madhya Pradesh: Oil factory owner in Indore arrested for packing palm oil in branded soyabean oil packets freepressjournal.in Indore: An oil factory owner was arrested for packing palm oil in the packets of different brands of soyabean and other vegetable oils in Palda area late on Friday. The joint team of food department and administration raided the factory and the sample of the oil was taken from there.
Bhanwarkuan police station incharge Santosh Kumar Dudhi said the raid was conducted at the factory named Bhole Food Product on Palda Road. The food department found that the factory owner Yogesh Kukreja, 40, a resident of Kesarbag Road was packing the imported palm oil in brand packets of soyabean and vegetable oils. He was also using a hallmark on the packets to gain consumers’ trust.
The officials found that the quality of palm oil was also not good. The team detained Kukreja and handed him over to police. The police have registered a case under Sections 420, 272, 273 of the IPC against the accused on the complaint of food inspector Himani Singh. soyabean oil palm oil substitution mislabeling substandard palm oil arrest case_registered alleged Indore, Madhya Pradesh, India Packing palm oil in soyabean oil packets prov:used soyabean oil packing the imported palm oil in brand packets of soyabean palm oil fflo:isSubstituteFor soyabean oil packing the imported palm oil in brand packets of soyabean Packing palm oil in soyabean oil packets fflo:hasFraudType Substitution packing palm oil in the packets of different brands of soyabean Packing palm oil in soyabean oil packets fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling packing palm oil in the packets of different brands of soyabean and other vegetable oils Palm oil fflo:foundAt Bhole Food Product factory named Bhole Food Product on Palda Road Packing palm oil in soyabean oil packets prov:wasAssociatedWith Yogesh Kukreja factory owner Yogesh Kukreja... was packing the imported palm oil92:Ta7d,15000 litres of adulterated cooking oil seized by FSSAI timesofindia.indiatimes.com Adulteration of food is a major concern in most third world countries, and India is no stranger to it. A lot of food products are mixed with foreign agents for a variety of reasons. Milk is often mixed with water, milk powder, and even detergent so that more milk can be saved to sell another batch. Vegetables and fruits are adulterated with dye to make the stale variety appear fresh. Adulterated food can be life threatening and can lead to multiple health issues that can be life threatening.
A new entrant to the adulterated food list is edible oil. The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) seized around 1500 litres of unlabelled cooking oil, on suspicion of it being adulterated. The oil tins were stocked in a warehouse near a town called Anur, Coimbatore, and were immediately seized. The warehouse belonged to a resident from Kariyagoundanur village, near Annur.
The surprise raid was conducted on Monday, 27th August, and it was found that the business was being run by a father-son duo, who were adding refined palm olein, a high fat liquid component of palm oil, to groundnut oil, coconut oil, and sunflower oil. Dr. K. Tamilselvan, Designated Officer of FSSAI in Coimbatore, said, “We have lifted samples of the oils, which will be tested in a Government food laboratory. Further action will be taken based on the test results.”
The duo was mixing super olein, which costs ₹70 per litre, and selling the adulterated groundnut oil for a price ranging from ₹240 to ₹280 per litre. They were selling the oil to many areas within Coimbatore such as Annur, Mettupalayam, Sirumugai and Periyanaickenpalayam, without having obtained a license from FSSAI to carry out the business. This had been going on for four years, and all the oil tins were unlabelled. The warehouse was sealed after the raid. groundnut oil coconut oil sunflower oil refined palm olein adulteration substitution dilution refined palm olein seizure warehouse sealed suspected Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India adulteration of groundnut oil, coconut oil, and sunflower oil prov:wasAssociatedWith father-son duo business was being run by a father-son duo, who were adding refined palm olein refined palm olein fflo:foundAt warehouse near Anur, Coimbatore oil tins were stocked in a warehouse near a town called Anur, Coimbatore adulteration of groundnut oil prov:wasAssociatedWith The duo The duo was mixing super olein, which costs ₹70 per litre, and selling the adulterated groundnut oil adulteration of groundnut oil fflo:inRegion Annur selling the oil to many areas within Coimbatore such as Annura:["$","div",null,{"className":"section-shell py-12","children":["$","$Lf",null,{"taxonomy":{"status":"extraction_derived","scope":"Qwen oil event-bearing articles only","taxonomy_version":"hierarchical_v1","classification_policy":"Deterministic parent categories and normalized concepts; original Qwen labels are retained as aliases.","facets":[{"id":"food_products","label":"Food products","description":"Products and ingredients represented in Qwen event objects.","groups":[{"id":"food_products:group:oil","name":"Oil","definition":"The parent food category for every normalized edible-oil product in this release.","occurrences":190,"article_count":133,"event_count":136,"article_ids":["oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-055a850c7fce9512","oil-05aa031a4b58524e","oil-06d5928124689ba0","oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-081117bbf714a215","oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0","oil-0d7b13a282f9b466","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","oil-13fd5c31e278a577","oil-156fd0980ec51fe6","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-1852e8a212bd5903","oil-1c3f4e35a1252449","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-23d97461886d2622","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-42c4efcdce45e35d","oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-438415c185832786","oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-4b88eb2520f8cc22","oil-4bd4c6831e9c7077","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-5413f17944743156","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-63426d939d718e7f","oil-63f43befc46e25fa","oil-66b89ef48f4536a9","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-7269f661e72c703f","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-7ced813eb9eb1314","oil-7ed3f9582cae741d","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-846611108e27fafb","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-86a403aef71f924e","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-8e1ede70f7533502","oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77","oil-94951aba738c80b3","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-9c21da748413e6f9","oil-9f582ea75e0eddfb","oil-a0831d014f72baf3","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-a882a3e8b7aeb487","oil-a9685f88d15906f6","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-b434a85e1e9196d0","oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-bd1df718191f8f6e","oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","oil-c0e8fd0149fa83c4","oil-c1a2f95596a3b00d","oil-c2fa50179af284f7","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-c4d815318f8299b0","oil-c72d68cafd2478be","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-c94e003c369b3450","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-ce4031737a7654b3","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-d276b566dce62194","oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","oil-d479413f1e610f85","oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-e1cd585e16b9635b","oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","oil-e72f16ac2686175c","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f1693a0670f7b784","oil-f5b6386895404f0b","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-f96a10806285c261","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-fba2e5ff157abb74","oil-fc5474312cf8529f","oil-fc714f38909e4348","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","oil-fcda56b4bb45ffd3","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9","oil-ff34df409a4806f1"],"entries":[{"id":"food_products:entry:oil:generic-edible-oil","name":"Generic edible oil","definition":"An edible-oil product reported without a more specific botanical source.","occurrences":49,"article_count":49,"event_count":49,"article_ids":["oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-05aa031a4b58524e","oil-06d5928124689ba0","oil-081117bbf714a215","oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-156fd0980ec51fe6","oil-1852e8a212bd5903","oil-1c3f4e35a1252449","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-4bd4c6831e9c7077","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-63f43befc46e25fa","oil-66b89ef48f4536a9","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-7ced813eb9eb1314","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-846611108e27fafb","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-c4d815318f8299b0","oil-c72d68cafd2478be","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-ce4031737a7654b3","oil-d479413f1e610f85","oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","oil-e1cd585e16b9635b","oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-fba2e5ff157abb74","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","oil-fcda56b4bb45ffd3","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant","fflo:EdibleOil","fflo:Food","fkg:EdibleOil","fkg:Food","fso:EdibleOil"],"aliases":["adulterated oils","edible oil","Edible Oils","gingelly oil","loose oil","miscible oil","oil"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:oil:mustard-oil","name":"Mustard oil","definition":"Oil produced from mustard seed, including named mustard-oil brands.","occurrences":37,"article_count":34,"event_count":34,"article_ids":["oil-081117bbf714a215","oil-13fd5c31e278a577","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-7269f661e72c703f","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-7ed3f9582cae741d","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77","oil-94951aba738c80b3","oil-9f582ea75e0eddfb","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-b434a85e1e9196d0","oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","oil-c0e8fd0149fa83c4","oil-c1a2f95596a3b00d","oil-c2fa50179af284f7","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-d276b566dce62194","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-f5b6386895404f0b","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f96a10806285c261"],"ontology_types":["edible_oil","fflo:EdibleOil","fflo:Food","fkg:EdibleOil","fkg:Food"],"aliases":["Fortune Kacchi Ghani Mustard Oil","Fortune Sarso Oil","mustard oil","Ranthambore brand mustard oil"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:oil:soybean-oil","name":"Soybean oil","definition":"Oil produced from soybean; spelling and refined-product variants are combined.","occurrences":25,"article_count":23,"event_count":24,"article_ids":["oil-055a850c7fce9512","oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-23d97461886d2622","oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-438415c185832786","oil-4b88eb2520f8cc22","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-7269f661e72c703f","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","oil-c1a2f95596a3b00d","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f1693a0670f7b784","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-fc714f38909e4348"],"ontology_types":["edible_oil","fflo:EdibleOil","fkg:EdibleOil","fkg:Food"],"aliases":["Fortune Refined Soybean Oil","halo refined soyabean oil","refined soyabean oil","refined soybean oil","siddha baba refined soyabean oil","soyabean oil","soybean oil"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:oil:coconut-oil","name":"Coconut oil","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 2 extracted labels.","occurrences":17,"article_count":17,"event_count":17,"article_ids":["oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-8e1ede70f7533502","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-9c21da748413e6f9","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","oil-a882a3e8b7aeb487","oil-a9685f88d15906f6","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-bd1df718191f8f6e","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-fc5474312cf8529f","oil-ff34df409a4806f1"],"ontology_types":["fflo:EdibleOil","fkg:Food"],"aliases":["coconut oil","surya coconut oil"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:oil:cooking-oil","name":"Cooking oil","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 2 extracted labels.","occurrences":15,"article_count":15,"event_count":15,"article_ids":["oil-0d7b13a282f9b466","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-63426d939d718e7f","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-c0e8fd0149fa83c4","oil-c94e003c369b3450","oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-e72f16ac2686175c","oil-f1693a0670f7b784","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8"],"ontology_types":["fflo:EdibleOil","fkg:EdibleOil","fkg:Food"],"aliases":["cooking oil","used cooking oil"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:oil:palm-oil","name":"Palm oil","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 2 extracted labels.","occurrences":11,"article_count":11,"event_count":11,"article_ids":["oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-438415c185832786","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-a0831d014f72baf3","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant","fflo:NaturalAdulterant","fkg:EdibleOil","fkg:Food","fkg:Ingredient"],"aliases":["palm oil","refined palm oil"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:oil:groundnut-or-peanut-oil","name":"Groundnut or peanut oil","definition":"Oil produced from groundnut or peanut; both names are treated as one product category.","occurrences":9,"article_count":9,"event_count":9,"article_ids":["oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3"],"ontology_types":["fflo:EdibleOil","fkg:EdibleOil","fkg:Food"],"aliases":["groundnut oil","peanut oil"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:oil:sunflower-oil","name":"Sunflower oil","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 3 extracted labels.","occurrences":7,"article_count":7,"event_count":7,"article_ids":["oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8"],"ontology_types":["fflo:EdibleOil","fflo:Food","fkg:Food"],"aliases":["halo refined sunflower oil","refined sunflower oil","sunflower oil"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:oil:palm-olein","name":"Palm olein","definition":"The liquid fraction of palm oil, including spelling variants such as palmolein.","occurrences":4,"article_count":3,"event_count":4,"article_ids":["oil-4b88eb2520f8cc22","oil-7ed3f9582cae741d","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8"],"ontology_types":["edible_oil","fflo:EdibleOil","fkg:Food"],"aliases":["palm olein oil","palmolein oil"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:oil:rice-bran-oil","name":"Rice bran oil","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":3,"article_count":3,"event_count":3,"article_ids":["oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-fc714f38909e4348"],"ontology_types":["fkg:EdibleOil","fkg:Food"],"aliases":["rice bran oil"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:oil:blended-or-multi-source-edible-oil","name":"Blended or multi-source edible oil","definition":"An edible-oil product represented as a blend of oils or sources.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["oil-42c4efcdce45e35d","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559"],"ontology_types":["fkg:Food"],"aliases":["blended cooking oil","Mast Health Multi-source Edible Oil"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:oil:branded-edible-oil","name":"Branded edible oil","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-c84820229ce8af05"],"ontology_types":["fkg:Food"],"aliases":["Fresh Heart brand oil"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:oil:refined-edible-oil","name":"Refined edible oil","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 2 extracted labels.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299"],"ontology_types":["fkg:Food"],"aliases":["Binni refined oil","refined oil"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:oil:almond-oil","name":"Almond oil","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-5413f17944743156"],"ontology_types":["fflo:EdibleOil"],"aliases":["almond oil"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:oil:condensate-oil","name":"Condensate oil","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-9790eee6e00c0018"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["condensate oil"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:oil:cottonseed-oil","name":"Cottonseed oil","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-86a403aef71f924e"],"ontology_types":["fflo:EdibleOil"],"aliases":["cottonseed oil"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:oil:kalonji-oil","name":"Kalonji oil","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-5413f17944743156"],"ontology_types":["fflo:EdibleOil"],"aliases":["kalonji oil"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:oil:safflower-oil","name":"Safflower oil","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-077084a32a4e8faa"],"ontology_types":["fkg:Food"],"aliases":["safflower oil"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:oil:vanaspati","name":"Vanaspati","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-c3728ff063420cf8"],"ontology_types":["fkg:Food"],"aliases":["vanaspati"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:oil:walnut-oil","name":"Walnut oil","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-5413f17944743156"],"ontology_types":["fflo:EdibleOil"],"aliases":["walnut oil"]}]}]},{"id":"issue_types","label":"Issue types","description":"Food-safety and fraud issue categories assigned to event objects.","groups":[{"id":"issue_types:group:food-fraud-and-authenticity","name":"Food fraud and authenticity","definition":"Issues concerning product identity, composition, substitution, dilution, or fraudulent presentation.","occurrences":146,"article_count":103,"event_count":104,"article_ids":["oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-05aa031a4b58524e","oil-06d5928124689ba0","oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-081117bbf714a215","oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0","oil-0d7b13a282f9b466","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","oil-13fd5c31e278a577","oil-156fd0980ec51fe6","oil-1852e8a212bd5903","oil-1c3f4e35a1252449","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-4b88eb2520f8cc22","oil-4bd4c6831e9c7077","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-5413f17944743156","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-63426d939d718e7f","oil-63f43befc46e25fa","oil-66b89ef48f4536a9","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-7269f661e72c703f","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-7ced813eb9eb1314","oil-7ed3f9582cae741d","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-846611108e27fafb","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-86a403aef71f924e","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-8e1ede70f7533502","oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77","oil-94951aba738c80b3","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-9c21da748413e6f9","oil-9f582ea75e0eddfb","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-a882a3e8b7aeb487","oil-a9685f88d15906f6","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-b434a85e1e9196d0","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","oil-c1a2f95596a3b00d","oil-c2fa50179af284f7","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-ce4031737a7654b3","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-d276b566dce62194","oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","oil-d479413f1e610f85","oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f1693a0670f7b784","oil-f5b6386895404f0b","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-f96a10806285c261","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-fc5474312cf8529f","oil-fc714f38909e4348","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","oil-fcda56b4bb45ffd3","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9","oil-ff34df409a4806f1"],"entries":[{"id":"issue_types:entry:food-fraud-and-authenticity:adulteration","name":"Adulteration","definition":"A substance, process, or product condition is reported as compromising the food.","occurrences":79,"article_count":79,"event_count":79,"article_ids":["oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-06d5928124689ba0","oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-081117bbf714a215","oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0","oil-0d7b13a282f9b466","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","oil-13fd5c31e278a577","oil-1852e8a212bd5903","oil-1c3f4e35a1252449","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-63426d939d718e7f","oil-63f43befc46e25fa","oil-66b89ef48f4536a9","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-7ced813eb9eb1314","oil-7ed3f9582cae741d","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-846611108e27fafb","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-86a403aef71f924e","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-8e1ede70f7533502","oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77","oil-94951aba738c80b3","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-9c21da748413e6f9","oil-9f582ea75e0eddfb","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-a882a3e8b7aeb487","oil-a9685f88d15906f6","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-b434a85e1e9196d0","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-c1a2f95596a3b00d","oil-c2fa50179af284f7","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-ce4031737a7654b3","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-d276b566dce62194","oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","oil-d479413f1e610f85","oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-f1693a0670f7b784","oil-f5b6386895404f0b","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f96a10806285c261","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-fc5474312cf8529f","oil-fc714f38909e4348","oil-fcda56b4bb45ffd3","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9","oil-ff34df409a4806f1"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["adulteration"]},{"id":"issue_types:entry:food-fraud-and-authenticity:mislabeling","name":"Mislabeling","definition":"The label, identity, composition, or declaration does not match the reported product.","occurrences":31,"article_count":31,"event_count":31,"article_ids":["oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-156fd0980ec51fe6","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-4b88eb2520f8cc22","oil-4bd4c6831e9c7077","oil-5413f17944743156","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-63426d939d718e7f","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-fc714f38909e4348","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["mislabeling"]},{"id":"issue_types:entry:food-fraud-and-authenticity:substitution","name":"Substitution","definition":"The expected food or ingredient is replaced wholly or partly by another material.","occurrences":17,"article_count":17,"event_count":17,"article_ids":["oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-ff34df409a4806f1"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["substitution"]},{"id":"issue_types:entry:food-fraud-and-authenticity:counterfeit","name":"Counterfeit","definition":"A product is presented as an authentic brand or food when it is allegedly fake.","occurrences":16,"article_count":16,"event_count":16,"article_ids":["oil-05aa031a4b58524e","oil-0d7b13a282f9b466","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-5413f17944743156","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-7269f661e72c703f","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["counterfeit"]},{"id":"issue_types:entry:food-fraud-and-authenticity:dilution","name":"Dilution","definition":"The product is weakened by adding a lower-value or undeclared material.","occurrences":3,"article_count":3,"event_count":3,"article_ids":["oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-ff34df409a4806f1"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["dilution"]}]},{"id":"issue_types:group:food-safety-and-quality","name":"Food safety and quality","definition":"Issues concerning contamination, standards, prohibited additives, or unsafe product condition.","occurrences":105,"article_count":79,"event_count":81,"article_ids":["oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-055a850c7fce9512","oil-05aa031a4b58524e","oil-081117bbf714a215","oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","oil-156fd0980ec51fe6","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-1852e8a212bd5903","oil-1c3f4e35a1252449","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-23d97461886d2622","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-42c4efcdce45e35d","oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-438415c185832786","oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-4b88eb2520f8cc22","oil-4bd4c6831e9c7077","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-63f43befc46e25fa","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-7ed3f9582cae741d","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-86a403aef71f924e","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-9f582ea75e0eddfb","oil-a0831d014f72baf3","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-a882a3e8b7aeb487","oil-a9685f88d15906f6","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-bd1df718191f8f6e","oil-c0e8fd0149fa83c4","oil-c1a2f95596a3b00d","oil-c4d815318f8299b0","oil-c72d68cafd2478be","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-c94e003c369b3450","oil-d276b566dce62194","oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba","oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-e1cd585e16b9635b","oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","oil-e72f16ac2686175c","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f5b6386895404f0b","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-f96a10806285c261","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-fba2e5ff157abb74","oil-fc5474312cf8529f","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"entries":[{"id":"issue_types:entry:food-safety-and-quality:substandard","name":"Substandard","definition":"The product is reported as failing a quality, composition, or safety requirement.","occurrences":71,"article_count":69,"event_count":71,"article_ids":["oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-055a850c7fce9512","oil-05aa031a4b58524e","oil-081117bbf714a215","oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0","oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","oil-156fd0980ec51fe6","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-1852e8a212bd5903","oil-1c3f4e35a1252449","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-23d97461886d2622","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-42c4efcdce45e35d","oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-438415c185832786","oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-4b88eb2520f8cc22","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-63f43befc46e25fa","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-7ed3f9582cae741d","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-86a403aef71f924e","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-9f582ea75e0eddfb","oil-a0831d014f72baf3","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-a882a3e8b7aeb487","oil-a9685f88d15906f6","oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-bd1df718191f8f6e","oil-c0e8fd0149fa83c4","oil-c1a2f95596a3b00d","oil-c4d815318f8299b0","oil-c72d68cafd2478be","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-c94e003c369b3450","oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba","oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","oil-e72f16ac2686175c","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-fba2e5ff157abb74","oil-fc5474312cf8529f","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["substandard"]},{"id":"issue_types:entry:food-safety-and-quality:unsafe-food","name":"Unsafe food","definition":"The report describes a concrete food-safety concern without a narrower issue type.","occurrences":17,"article_count":16,"event_count":17,"article_ids":["oil-055a850c7fce9512","oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-23d97461886d2622","oil-4bd4c6831e9c7077","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","oil-c4d815318f8299b0","oil-c94e003c369b3450","oil-e72f16ac2686175c","oil-f96a10806285c261","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["unsafe_food"]},{"id":"issue_types:entry:food-safety-and-quality:contamination","name":"Contamination","definition":"The product contains an unwanted physical, chemical, or biological contaminant.","occurrences":15,"article_count":15,"event_count":15,"article_ids":["oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77","oil-a0831d014f72baf3","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-d276b566dce62194","oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba","oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-e1cd585e16b9635b","oil-f5b6386895404f0b"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["contamination"]},{"id":"issue_types:entry:food-safety-and-quality:prohibited-additive","name":"Prohibited additive","definition":"The report identifies an additive that is not permitted for the stated use.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-e1cd585e16b9635b"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["prohibited_additive"]}]}]},{"id":"adulterants","label":"Adulterants and reported materials","description":"Named or generic materials represented as adulterants in extracted events.","groups":[{"id":"adulterants:group:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product","name":"Degraded, fake, or unspecified product","definition":"Product-condition descriptions where a more specific adulterant is not established.","occurrences":27,"article_count":27,"event_count":27,"article_ids":["oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0","oil-0d7b13a282f9b466","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-8e1ede70f7533502","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-9c21da748413e6f9","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","oil-a882a3e8b7aeb487","oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba","oil-e1cd585e16b9635b","oil-f96a10806285c261","oil-fc5474312cf8529f","oil-ff34df409a4806f1"],"entries":[{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:unspecified-material","name":"Unspecified material","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 4 extracted labels.","occurrences":5,"article_count":5,"event_count":5,"article_ids":["oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-8e1ede70f7533502","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-fc5474312cf8529f"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant","fflo:UnknownAdulterant"],"aliases":["unknown","unknown adulterant","unspecified","unspecified adulterant"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:adulterated-oil","name":"Adulterated oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":3,"article_count":3,"event_count":3,"article_ids":["oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-9c21da748413e6f9"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["adulterated oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:expired-cooking-oil","name":"Expired cooking oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-97103cc7b062d80c"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["expired cooking oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:adulterated-coconut-oil","name":"Adulterated coconut oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["adulterated coconut oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:adulterated-mustard-oil","name":"Adulterated mustard oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-f96a10806285c261"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["adulterated mustard oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:fake-coconut-oil","name":"Fake coconut oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["fake coconut oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:fake-cooking-oil","name":"Fake cooking oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-0d7b13a282f9b466"],"ontology_types":["fflo:AdulteratedProduct"],"aliases":["fake cooking oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:harmful-substances","name":"Harmful substances","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-077084a32a4e8faa"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["harmful substances"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:impure-edible-oil","name":"Impure edible oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-5ac9372e2a178a90"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["impure edible oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:inferior-and-adulterated-oils","name":"Inferior and adulterated oils","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-a882a3e8b7aeb487"],"ontology_types":["fkg:Adulterant"],"aliases":["inferior and adulterated oils"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:miscible-oil","name":"Miscible oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-d7ec006e22e070de"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["miscible oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:old-oil","name":"Old oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-85127f0bde3109d3"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["old oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:reused-cooking-oil","name":"Reused cooking oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-af3a540365afc7c2"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["reused cooking oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:reused-tin-containers","name":"Reused tin containers","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-e1cd585e16b9635b"],"ontology_types":["fkg:PackagingMaterial"],"aliases":["reused tin containers"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:spurious-oil","name":"Spurious oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["spurious oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:sunflower-oil","name":"Sunflower oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-ff34df409a4806f1"],"ontology_types":["fflo:NaturalAdulterant"],"aliases":["sunflower oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:suspicious-samples","name":"Suspicious samples","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-daf4ca29b4849989"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["suspicious samples"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:testa-oil","name":"Testa oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2"],"ontology_types":["fflo:NaturalAdulterant"],"aliases":["testa oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:total-polar-materials","name":"Total polar materials","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba"],"ontology_types":["fflo:ContaminantAdulterant"],"aliases":["total polar materials"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:unfit-edible-oil","name":"Unfit edible oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-2f0a177eecae442b"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["unfit edible oil"]}]},{"id":"adulterants:group:substitute-oils-and-fats","name":"Substitute oils and fats","definition":"Lower-value, undeclared, or non-food oils and fats reported as substitutes.","occurrences":15,"article_count":14,"event_count":14,"article_ids":["oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-846611108e27fafb","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-ff34df409a4806f1"],"entries":[{"id":"adulterants:entry:substitute-oils-and-fats:palm-oil-or-palm-olein","name":"Palm oil or palm olein","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 2 extracted labels.","occurrences":7,"article_count":7,"event_count":7,"article_ids":["oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-ff34df409a4806f1"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant","fflo:NaturalAdulterant","fkg:Food"],"aliases":["palm oil","refined palm olein"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:substitute-oils-and-fats:lower-grade-or-unspecified-oil","name":"Lower-grade or unspecified oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 3 extracted labels.","occurrences":3,"article_count":3,"event_count":3,"article_ids":["oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502"],"ontology_types":["fflo:NaturalAdulterant","fkg:Food"],"aliases":["cheaper brands","local oil","other oils"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:substitute-oils-and-fats:rice-bran-oil","name":"Rice bran oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3"],"ontology_types":["fflo:NaturalAdulterant"],"aliases":["rice bran oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:substitute-oils-and-fats:animal-fat","name":"Animal fat","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-077084a32a4e8faa"],"ontology_types":["fflo:NaturalAdulterant"],"aliases":["animal fats"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:substitute-oils-and-fats:condensate-oil","name":"Condensate oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-9790eee6e00c0018"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["condensate oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:substitute-oils-and-fats:used-motor-oil","name":"Used motor oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-846611108e27fafb"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["used motor oil"]}]},{"id":"adulterants:group:chemicals-additives-and-quality-indicators","name":"Chemicals, additives, and quality indicators","definition":"Chemical substances, additives, or measured quality indicators reported in connection with the issue.","occurrences":6,"article_count":6,"event_count":6,"article_ids":["oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"entries":[{"id":"adulterants:entry:chemicals-additives-and-quality-indicators:vitamin-d","name":"Vitamin d","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["Vitamin D"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:chemicals-additives-and-quality-indicators:colouring-material","name":"Colouring material","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-898a1362002b727d"],"ontology_types":["fkg:Substance"],"aliases":["colouring material"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:chemicals-additives-and-quality-indicators:sulphur","name":"Sulphur","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-b96369f55af40397"],"ontology_types":["fkg:Chemical"],"aliases":["sulphur"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:chemicals-additives-and-quality-indicators:total-polar-compound","name":"Total polar compound","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff"],"ontology_types":["fflo:ContaminantAdulterant"],"aliases":["Total Polar Compound"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:chemicals-additives-and-quality-indicators:total-polar-compounds","name":"Total polar compounds","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5"],"ontology_types":["fflo:ContaminantAdulterant"],"aliases":["Total Polar Compounds"]}]},{"id":"adulterants:group:toxic-seeds-and-plant-oils","name":"Toxic seeds and plant oils","definition":"Named toxic botanical materials or oils reported as adulterants.","occurrences":5,"article_count":5,"event_count":5,"article_ids":["oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-e1aa62675070cacd"],"entries":[{"id":"adulterants:entry:toxic-seeds-and-plant-oils:argemone-seed-or-oil","name":"Argemone seed or oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 5 extracted labels.","occurrences":5,"article_count":5,"event_count":5,"article_ids":["oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-e1aa62675070cacd"],"ontology_types":["fflo:NaturalAdulterant"],"aliases":["argemone","Argemone mexicana","Argemone mexicana seed oil","argemone mexicana seeds","Argemone oil"]}]},{"id":"adulterants:group:physical-contaminants","name":"Physical contaminants","definition":"Foreign physical material reported in the food product.","occurrences":5,"article_count":3,"event_count":3,"article_ids":["oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-7ced813eb9eb1314"],"entries":[{"id":"adulterants:entry:physical-contaminants:dust","name":"Dust","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559"],"ontology_types":["fflo:ContaminantAdulterant"],"aliases":["dust"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:physical-contaminants:animal-carcasses","name":"Animal carcasses","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-7ced813eb9eb1314"],"ontology_types":["fflo:NaturalAdulterant"],"aliases":["animal carcasses"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:physical-contaminants:mud","name":"Mud","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-0db512df7c0cc7df"],"ontology_types":["fflo:ContaminantAdulterant"],"aliases":["mud"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:physical-contaminants:sand","name":"Sand","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559"],"ontology_types":["fflo:ContaminantAdulterant"],"aliases":["sand"]}]}]},{"id":"claim_statuses","label":"Claim status","description":"How strongly the article presents the event claim, kept separate from relevance.","groups":[{"id":"claim_statuses:group:unconfirmed-or-qualified-finding","name":"Unconfirmed or qualified finding","definition":"Suspected, alleged, pending, or otherwise unresolved claims.","occurrences":132,"article_count":129,"event_count":132,"article_ids":["oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-055a850c7fce9512","oil-05aa031a4b58524e","oil-06d5928124689ba0","oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-081117bbf714a215","oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0","oil-0d7b13a282f9b466","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","oil-13fd5c31e278a577","oil-156fd0980ec51fe6","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-1852e8a212bd5903","oil-1c3f4e35a1252449","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-23d97461886d2622","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-42c4efcdce45e35d","oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-438415c185832786","oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-4b88eb2520f8cc22","oil-4bd4c6831e9c7077","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-5413f17944743156","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-63426d939d718e7f","oil-63f43befc46e25fa","oil-66b89ef48f4536a9","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-7269f661e72c703f","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-7ced813eb9eb1314","oil-7ed3f9582cae741d","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-846611108e27fafb","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-86a403aef71f924e","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-8e1ede70f7533502","oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77","oil-94951aba738c80b3","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-9c21da748413e6f9","oil-9f582ea75e0eddfb","oil-a0831d014f72baf3","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-a882a3e8b7aeb487","oil-a9685f88d15906f6","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-b434a85e1e9196d0","oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-bd1df718191f8f6e","oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","oil-c0e8fd0149fa83c4","oil-c1a2f95596a3b00d","oil-c2fa50179af284f7","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-c4d815318f8299b0","oil-c72d68cafd2478be","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-c94e003c369b3450","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-ce4031737a7654b3","oil-d276b566dce62194","oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","oil-d479413f1e610f85","oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-e1cd585e16b9635b","oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","oil-e72f16ac2686175c","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f1693a0670f7b784","oil-f5b6386895404f0b","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-f96a10806285c261","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-fba2e5ff157abb74","oil-fc5474312cf8529f","oil-fc714f38909e4348","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","oil-fcda56b4bb45ffd3","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5","oil-ff34df409a4806f1"],"entries":[{"id":"claim_statuses:entry:unconfirmed-or-qualified-finding:suspected","name":"Suspected","definition":"A concrete event is reported, but the issue remains a suspicion rather than a confirmed result.","occurrences":95,"article_count":92,"event_count":95,"article_ids":["oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-055a850c7fce9512","oil-05aa031a4b58524e","oil-06d5928124689ba0","oil-081117bbf714a215","oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-0d7b13a282f9b466","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","oil-1852e8a212bd5903","oil-1c3f4e35a1252449","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-23d97461886d2622","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-42c4efcdce45e35d","oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-438415c185832786","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-4b88eb2520f8cc22","oil-4bd4c6831e9c7077","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-5413f17944743156","oil-63426d939d718e7f","oil-63f43befc46e25fa","oil-66b89ef48f4536a9","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-7ed3f9582cae741d","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-86a403aef71f924e","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-8e1ede70f7533502","oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77","oil-94951aba738c80b3","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-9c21da748413e6f9","oil-9f582ea75e0eddfb","oil-a0831d014f72baf3","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-a9685f88d15906f6","oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-b434a85e1e9196d0","oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-c0e8fd0149fa83c4","oil-c1a2f95596a3b00d","oil-c2fa50179af284f7","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-c4d815318f8299b0","oil-c72d68cafd2478be","oil-c94e003c369b3450","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-e1cd585e16b9635b","oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f1693a0670f7b784","oil-f5b6386895404f0b","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-f96a10806285c261","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-fba2e5ff157abb74","oil-fc714f38909e4348","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","oil-fcda56b4bb45ffd3","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["suspected"]},{"id":"claim_statuses:entry:unconfirmed-or-qualified-finding:alleged","name":"Alleged","definition":"The source attributes the issue as an allegation.","occurrences":30,"article_count":30,"event_count":30,"article_ids":["oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0","oil-156fd0980ec51fe6","oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-7269f661e72c703f","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-7ced813eb9eb1314","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-846611108e27fafb","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-a882a3e8b7aeb487","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-ce4031737a7654b3","oil-d276b566dce62194","oil-d479413f1e610f85","oil-e72f16ac2686175c","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-fc5474312cf8529f","oil-ff34df409a4806f1"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["alleged"]},{"id":"claim_statuses:entry:unconfirmed-or-qualified-finding:unclear","name":"Unclear","definition":"The available evidence does not establish one more specific status.","occurrences":4,"article_count":4,"event_count":4,"article_ids":["oil-13fd5c31e278a577","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-bd1df718191f8f6e"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["unclear"]},{"id":"claim_statuses:entry:unconfirmed-or-qualified-finding:pending-test","name":"Pending test","definition":"The target product has been sent for testing and no final result is reported.","occurrences":3,"article_count":3,"event_count":3,"article_ids":["oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["pending_test"]}]},{"id":"claim_statuses:group:confirmed-finding","name":"Confirmed finding","definition":"Claims presented as supported by a reported laboratory result.","occurrences":4,"article_count":4,"event_count":4,"article_ids":["oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"entries":[{"id":"claim_statuses:entry:confirmed-finding:lab-confirmed","name":"Lab confirmed","definition":"A laboratory result is reported as confirming the finding.","occurrences":4,"article_count":4,"event_count":4,"article_ids":["oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["lab_confirmed"]}]}]},{"id":"regulatory_actions","label":"Regulatory actions","description":"Reported enforcement, inspection, seizure, legal, or administrative actions.","groups":[{"id":"regulatory_actions:group:product-control-measures","name":"Product control measures","definition":"Actions that seize, confiscate, prohibit, or otherwise remove products from circulation.","occurrences":84,"article_count":80,"event_count":83,"article_ids":["oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-055a850c7fce9512","oil-05aa031a4b58524e","oil-081117bbf714a215","oil-0d7b13a282f9b466","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","oil-1852e8a212bd5903","oil-1c3f4e35a1252449","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-23d97461886d2622","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-438415c185832786","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-4bd4c6831e9c7077","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-5413f17944743156","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-63426d939d718e7f","oil-63f43befc46e25fa","oil-66b89ef48f4536a9","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-7ced813eb9eb1314","oil-7ed3f9582cae741d","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-86a403aef71f924e","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-94951aba738c80b3","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-9f582ea75e0eddfb","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-a882a3e8b7aeb487","oil-a9685f88d15906f6","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-b434a85e1e9196d0","oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","oil-c1a2f95596a3b00d","oil-c2fa50179af284f7","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-c4d815318f8299b0","oil-c72d68cafd2478be","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-ce4031737a7654b3","oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","oil-d479413f1e610f85","oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f1693a0670f7b784","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-fba2e5ff157abb74","oil-fc5474312cf8529f","oil-fc714f38909e4348","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","oil-fcda56b4bb45ffd3"],"entries":[{"id":"regulatory_actions:entry:product-control-measures:seizure-or-confiscation","name":"Seizure or confiscation","definition":"A product-control action taking reported goods into official custody.","occurrences":82,"article_count":78,"event_count":81,"article_ids":["oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-055a850c7fce9512","oil-05aa031a4b58524e","oil-081117bbf714a215","oil-0d7b13a282f9b466","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","oil-1852e8a212bd5903","oil-1c3f4e35a1252449","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-23d97461886d2622","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-438415c185832786","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-4bd4c6831e9c7077","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-5413f17944743156","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-63426d939d718e7f","oil-63f43befc46e25fa","oil-66b89ef48f4536a9","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-7ced813eb9eb1314","oil-7ed3f9582cae741d","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-86a403aef71f924e","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-94951aba738c80b3","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-9f582ea75e0eddfb","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-a9685f88d15906f6","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-b434a85e1e9196d0","oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","oil-c1a2f95596a3b00d","oil-c2fa50179af284f7","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-c4d815318f8299b0","oil-c72d68cafd2478be","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-ce4031737a7654b3","oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","oil-d479413f1e610f85","oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f1693a0670f7b784","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-fba2e5ff157abb74","oil-fc714f38909e4348","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","oil-fcda56b4bb45ffd3"],"ontology_types":["fflo:EnforcementAction","fflo:RegulatoryAction","fflo:Seizure","fkg:RegulatoryAction","fkg:Seizure","fso:RegulatoryAction","seizure"],"aliases":["confiscation","seizure","Seizure of 15 litres of cooking oil","Seizure of 34 litre refined soyabean oil","Seizure of 799 litre mustard oil","Seizure of adulterated food and oil","seizure of adulterated oil","seizure of goods"]},{"id":"regulatory_actions:entry:product-control-measures:ban-or-prohibition","name":"Ban or prohibition","definition":"A regulatory action prohibiting a product, brand, activity, or sale.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["oil-a882a3e8b7aeb487","oil-fc5474312cf8529f"],"ontology_types":["fflo:RegulatoryAction","fkg:RegulatoryAction"],"aliases":["ban on 166 coconut oil brands","banning of 42 brands of coconut oil"]}]},{"id":"regulatory_actions:group:legal-and-corrective-measures","name":"Legal and corrective measures","definition":"Arrest, case registration, prosecution, fines, notices, warnings, and advisories.","occurrences":52,"article_count":47,"event_count":47,"article_ids":["oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-06d5928124689ba0","oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-156fd0980ec51fe6","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-1c3f4e35a1252449","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-42c4efcdce45e35d","oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-7269f661e72c703f","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-bd1df718191f8f6e","oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","oil-c0e8fd0149fa83c4","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-c94e003c369b3450","oil-ce4031737a7654b3","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-e1cd585e16b9635b","oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","oil-e72f16ac2686175c","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f1693a0670f7b784","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","oil-fcda56b4bb45ffd3","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5"],"entries":[{"id":"regulatory_actions:entry:legal-and-corrective-measures:case-registration-or-fir","name":"Case registration or FIR","definition":"Registration or filing of a police or regulatory case, including an FIR.","occurrences":13,"article_count":13,"event_count":13,"article_ids":["oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-7269f661e72c703f","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","oil-ce4031737a7654b3","oil-f1693a0670f7b784","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","oil-fcda56b4bb45ffd3"],"ontology_types":["fflo:RegulatoryAction","fkg:LegalAction","fkg:RegulatoryAction","fso:RegulatoryAction"],"aliases":["booking","booking of persons","booking of three persons","case registration","case_booked","case_filed","FIR filed","FIR lodged","First Information Report","registration of criminal cases"]},{"id":"regulatory_actions:entry:legal-and-corrective-measures:notice-warning-or-advisory","name":"Notice, warning, or advisory","definition":"A normalized regulatory actions concept combining 12 extracted labels.","occurrences":13,"article_count":13,"event_count":13,"article_ids":["oil-06d5928124689ba0","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-42c4efcdce45e35d","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-e1cd585e16b9635b","oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","oil-e72f16ac2686175c","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5"],"ontology_types":["fflo:RegulatoryAction","fkg:RegulatoryAction"],"aliases":["advisory","correction notices","formal improvement notice","improvement notice","notice","notice issued","Notice to 55 edible oil manufacturers","notices","public announcement","public notice","show-cause notice","warning"]},{"id":"regulatory_actions:entry:legal-and-corrective-measures:arrest-or-custody","name":"Arrest or custody","definition":"A normalized regulatory actions concept combining 3 extracted labels.","occurrences":12,"article_count":12,"event_count":12,"article_ids":["oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-156fd0980ec51fe6","oil-1c3f4e35a1252449","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-f138f57de764f810"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Custody","fflo:RegulatoryAction","fkg:RegulatoryAction"],"aliases":["arrest","custody","detention"]},{"id":"regulatory_actions:entry:legal-and-corrective-measures:financial-penalty","name":"Financial penalty","definition":"A fine or monetary penalty imposed or reported.","occurrences":7,"article_count":6,"event_count":6,"article_ids":["oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-bd1df718191f8f6e","oil-c0e8fd0149fa83c4","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40"],"ontology_types":["fflo:RegulatoryAction","fkg:RegulatoryAction"],"aliases":["fine of Rs 20,000 each under Section 51 of the FSSA","fine of Rs 5,000 each under Section 59 (i) of the Act","Fine of ₹7 lakh","fines","penalty","Rs 2 lakh fine","Rs 2.25 lakh fine"]},{"id":"regulatory_actions:entry:legal-and-corrective-measures:prosecution-or-legal-action","name":"Prosecution or legal action","definition":"A normalized regulatory actions concept combining 4 extracted labels.","occurrences":5,"article_count":5,"event_count":5,"article_ids":["oil-42c4efcdce45e35d","oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-c84820229ce8af05"],"ontology_types":["fflo:RegulatoryAction","fso:RegulatoryAction"],"aliases":["criminal proceedings likely","legal action","Legal action under Food Safety and Standards Act","legal proceedings"]},{"id":"regulatory_actions:entry:legal-and-corrective-measures:other-corrective-action","name":"Other corrective action","definition":"A normalized regulatory actions concept combining 2 extracted labels.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-c94e003c369b3450"],"ontology_types":["fflo:RegulatoryAction"],"aliases":["Action is being initiated against the outlet","necessary action"]}]},{"id":"regulatory_actions:group:inspection-and-evidence-collection","name":"Inspection and evidence collection","definition":"Raids, inspections, sampling, testing orders, and survey activity.","occurrences":34,"article_count":32,"event_count":33,"article_ids":["oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-4bd4c6831e9c7077","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-66b89ef48f4536a9","oil-7269f661e72c703f","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-9f582ea75e0eddfb","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-b434a85e1e9196d0","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"entries":[{"id":"regulatory_actions:entry:inspection-and-evidence-collection:raid-or-search","name":"Raid or search","definition":"An enforcement visit or search of premises.","occurrences":24,"article_count":23,"event_count":24,"article_ids":["oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-4bd4c6831e9c7077","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-66b89ef48f4536a9","oil-7269f661e72c703f","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-9f582ea75e0eddfb","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"ontology_types":["fflo:RegulatoryAction","fkg:RegulatoryAction","fso:RegulatoryAction"],"aliases":["Operation Oil","raid","raid on Singhania oil mill","raids","surprise raid"]},{"id":"regulatory_actions:entry:inspection-and-evidence-collection:inspection-or-survey","name":"Inspection or survey","definition":"A normalized regulatory actions concept combining 2 extracted labels.","occurrences":5,"article_count":5,"event_count":5,"article_ids":["oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60"],"ontology_types":["fflo:RegulatoryAction","fkg:RegulatoryAction"],"aliases":["inspection","survey"]},{"id":"regulatory_actions:entry:inspection-and-evidence-collection:sampling-or-testing-order","name":"Sampling or testing order","definition":"Collection of samples or an instruction that samples be tested.","occurrences":5,"article_count":5,"event_count":5,"article_ids":["oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-b434a85e1e9196d0","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-d6d2041d0727d059"],"ontology_types":["fflo:RegulatoryAction","fkg:RegulatoryAction","fso:Action"],"aliases":["order to collect mustard oil samples for testing","sample collection","sample_collection","sampling"]}]},{"id":"regulatory_actions:group:investigation-and-administration","name":"Investigation and administration","definition":"Investigations, inquiries, committees, referrals, and administrative directions.","occurrences":19,"article_count":17,"event_count":17,"article_ids":["oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-846611108e27fafb","oil-86a403aef71f924e","oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f5b6386895404f0b","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-fc5474312cf8529f","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"entries":[{"id":"regulatory_actions:entry:investigation-and-administration:other-reported-action","name":"Other reported action","definition":"A normalized regulatory actions concept combining 11 extracted labels.","occurrences":11,"article_count":10,"event_count":10,"article_ids":["oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f5b6386895404f0b","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-fc5474312cf8529f","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"ontology_types":["fflo:RegulatoryAction","fso:RegulatoryAction"],"aliases":["Action will be initiated soon","case_registered","court proceedings","destroyed","destruction","destruction of oil","medical observation","public advisories","public alert","special drives","stop sale order"]},{"id":"regulatory_actions:entry:investigation-and-administration:investigation-or-inquiry","name":"Investigation or inquiry","definition":"A normalized regulatory actions concept combining 4 extracted labels.","occurrences":4,"article_count":4,"event_count":4,"article_ids":["oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-86a403aef71f924e","oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d"],"ontology_types":["fflo:RegulatoryAction"],"aliases":["committee formation","investigation","probe","urgent inquiry directive"]},{"id":"regulatory_actions:entry:investigation-and-administration:administrative-direction-or-referral","name":"Administrative direction or referral","definition":"A normalized regulatory actions concept combining 4 extracted labels.","occurrences":4,"article_count":3,"event_count":3,"article_ids":["oil-846611108e27fafb","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-d7ec006e22e070de"],"ontology_types":["fflo:RegulatoryAction"],"aliases":["Directive to Centre on lab expansion","directive to find central govt policy","referred to Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission","written to Ministry of Petroleum and Chemicals"]}]},{"id":"regulatory_actions:group:premises-and-licence-controls","name":"Premises and licence controls","definition":"Closure, sealing, operational suspension, or licence action.","occurrences":16,"article_count":14,"event_count":14,"article_ids":["oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-4b88eb2520f8cc22","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","oil-fba2e5ff157abb74"],"entries":[{"id":"regulatory_actions:entry:premises-and-licence-controls:closure-or-sealing","name":"Closure or sealing","definition":"Closure or sealing of premises, storage, equipment, or a business unit.","occurrences":12,"article_count":12,"event_count":12,"article_ids":["oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","oil-fba2e5ff157abb74"],"ontology_types":["fflo:RegulatoryAction","fkg:RegulatoryAction","fso:RegulatoryAction"],"aliases":["closure","premises sealed","sealed","sealing","sealing of coconut oil unit","warehouse sealed"]},{"id":"regulatory_actions:entry:premises-and-licence-controls:licence-or-operational-suspension","name":"Licence or operational suspension","definition":"Suspension of a licence or direction to stop operations.","occurrences":4,"article_count":4,"event_count":4,"article_ids":["oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-4b88eb2520f8cc22","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497"],"ontology_types":["fflo:RegulatoryAction","fso:RegulatoryAction","regulatory_action"],"aliases":["suspend operations","suspension","suspension of licence"]}]}]},{"id":"supply_chain_stages","label":"Supply-chain stages","description":"Where the extracted event is situated in the food supply chain.","groups":[{"id":"supply_chain_stages:group:downstream-supply-chain","name":"Downstream supply chain","definition":"Retail and point-of-sale stages.","occurrences":82,"article_count":79,"event_count":82,"article_ids":["oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-055a850c7fce9512","oil-05aa031a4b58524e","oil-06d5928124689ba0","oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-081117bbf714a215","oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0","oil-0d7b13a282f9b466","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","oil-156fd0980ec51fe6","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-23d97461886d2622","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-42c4efcdce45e35d","oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-4b88eb2520f8cc22","oil-4bd4c6831e9c7077","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-5413f17944743156","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-63f43befc46e25fa","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-7ced813eb9eb1314","oil-7ed3f9582cae741d","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-846611108e27fafb","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-8e1ede70f7533502","oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-9c21da748413e6f9","oil-9f582ea75e0eddfb","oil-a0831d014f72baf3","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","oil-a882a3e8b7aeb487","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-b434a85e1e9196d0","oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-bd1df718191f8f6e","oil-c1a2f95596a3b00d","oil-c2fa50179af284f7","oil-c72d68cafd2478be","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-c94e003c369b3450","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","oil-d479413f1e610f85","oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba","oil-e1cd585e16b9635b","oil-e72f16ac2686175c","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f1693a0670f7b784","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-fba2e5ff157abb74","oil-fc714f38909e4348","oil-fcda56b4bb45ffd3","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9","oil-ff34df409a4806f1"],"entries":[{"id":"supply_chain_stages:entry:downstream-supply-chain:retail","name":"Retail","definition":"A normalized supply-chain stages concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":82,"article_count":79,"event_count":82,"article_ids":["oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-055a850c7fce9512","oil-05aa031a4b58524e","oil-06d5928124689ba0","oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-081117bbf714a215","oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0","oil-0d7b13a282f9b466","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","oil-156fd0980ec51fe6","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-23d97461886d2622","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-42c4efcdce45e35d","oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-4b88eb2520f8cc22","oil-4bd4c6831e9c7077","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-5413f17944743156","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-63f43befc46e25fa","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-7ced813eb9eb1314","oil-7ed3f9582cae741d","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-846611108e27fafb","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-8e1ede70f7533502","oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-9c21da748413e6f9","oil-9f582ea75e0eddfb","oil-a0831d014f72baf3","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","oil-a882a3e8b7aeb487","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-b434a85e1e9196d0","oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-bd1df718191f8f6e","oil-c1a2f95596a3b00d","oil-c2fa50179af284f7","oil-c72d68cafd2478be","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-c94e003c369b3450","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","oil-d479413f1e610f85","oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba","oil-e1cd585e16b9635b","oil-e72f16ac2686175c","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f1693a0670f7b784","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-fba2e5ff157abb74","oil-fc714f38909e4348","oil-fcda56b4bb45ffd3","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9","oil-ff34df409a4806f1"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["retail"]}]},{"id":"supply_chain_stages:group:trade-and-distribution","name":"Trade and distribution","definition":"Distribution, import, and export stages.","occurrences":35,"article_count":35,"event_count":35,"article_ids":["oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-7269f661e72c703f","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-846611108e27fafb","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-a9685f88d15906f6","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-fc5474312cf8529f","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"entries":[{"id":"supply_chain_stages:entry:trade-and-distribution:distribution","name":"Distribution","definition":"A normalized supply-chain stages concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":33,"article_count":33,"event_count":33,"article_ids":["oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-7269f661e72c703f","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-846611108e27fafb","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-a9685f88d15906f6","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-fc5474312cf8529f","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["distribution"]},{"id":"supply_chain_stages:entry:trade-and-distribution:export","name":"Export","definition":"A normalized supply-chain stages concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-a7080ed266c36f88"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["export"]},{"id":"supply_chain_stages:entry:trade-and-distribution:import","name":"Import","definition":"A normalized supply-chain stages concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-e8284ce4427f4e60"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["import"]}]},{"id":"supply_chain_stages:group:midstream-supply-chain","name":"Midstream supply chain","definition":"Processing, packaging, and storage stages.","occurrences":30,"article_count":28,"event_count":28,"article_ids":["oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-1c3f4e35a1252449","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-438415c185832786","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-66b89ef48f4536a9","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-94951aba738c80b3","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-a9685f88d15906f6","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-e1cd585e16b9635b","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae"],"entries":[{"id":"supply_chain_stages:entry:midstream-supply-chain:processing","name":"Processing","definition":"A normalized supply-chain stages concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":13,"article_count":13,"event_count":13,"article_ids":["oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-a9685f88d15906f6","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["processing"]},{"id":"supply_chain_stages:entry:midstream-supply-chain:storage","name":"Storage","definition":"A normalized supply-chain stages concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":9,"article_count":9,"event_count":9,"article_ids":["oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-1c3f4e35a1252449","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-94951aba738c80b3","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["storage"]},{"id":"supply_chain_stages:entry:midstream-supply-chain:packaging","name":"Packaging","definition":"A normalized supply-chain stages concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":8,"article_count":8,"event_count":8,"article_ids":["oil-438415c185832786","oil-66b89ef48f4536a9","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-e1cd585e16b9635b","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["packaging"]}]},{"id":"supply_chain_stages:group:upstream-supply-chain","name":"Upstream supply chain","definition":"Primary production stages.","occurrences":19,"article_count":19,"event_count":19,"article_ids":["oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-1852e8a212bd5903","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-63426d939d718e7f","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-86a403aef71f924e","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-ce4031737a7654b3","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a"],"entries":[{"id":"supply_chain_stages:entry:upstream-supply-chain:production","name":"Production","definition":"A normalized supply-chain stages concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":19,"article_count":19,"event_count":19,"article_ids":["oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-1852e8a212bd5903","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-63426d939d718e7f","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-86a403aef71f924e","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-ce4031737a7654b3","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["production"]}]}]},{"id":"detection_methods","label":"Detection methods","description":"Methods reported as identifying or investigating the issue.","groups":[{"id":"detection_methods:group:regulatory-field-detection","name":"Regulatory field detection","definition":"Inspection, raid, search, or enforcement activity used to identify a possible issue.","occurrences":106,"article_count":101,"event_count":104,"article_ids":["oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-055a850c7fce9512","oil-05aa031a4b58524e","oil-06d5928124689ba0","oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-081117bbf714a215","oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0","oil-0d7b13a282f9b466","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","oil-156fd0980ec51fe6","oil-1852e8a212bd5903","oil-1c3f4e35a1252449","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-23d97461886d2622","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-438415c185832786","oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-4b88eb2520f8cc22","oil-4bd4c6831e9c7077","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-5413f17944743156","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-63426d939d718e7f","oil-63f43befc46e25fa","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-7269f661e72c703f","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-7ced813eb9eb1314","oil-7ed3f9582cae741d","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-86a403aef71f924e","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-94951aba738c80b3","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-9f582ea75e0eddfb","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-a882a3e8b7aeb487","oil-a9685f88d15906f6","oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-b434a85e1e9196d0","oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","oil-c1a2f95596a3b00d","oil-c2fa50179af284f7","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-c4d815318f8299b0","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-c94e003c369b3450","oil-ce4031737a7654b3","oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","oil-d479413f1e610f85","oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-e1cd585e16b9635b","oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","oil-e72f16ac2686175c","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f1693a0670f7b784","oil-f5b6386895404f0b","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-f96a10806285c261","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-fba2e5ff157abb74","oil-fc714f38909e4348","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","oil-fcda56b4bb45ffd3","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9","oil-ff34df409a4806f1"],"entries":[{"id":"detection_methods:entry:regulatory-field-detection:inspection","name":"Inspection","definition":"A normalized detection methods concept combining 9 extracted labels.","occurrences":65,"article_count":62,"event_count":65,"article_ids":["oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-055a850c7fce9512","oil-06d5928124689ba0","oil-081117bbf714a215","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","oil-156fd0980ec51fe6","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-23d97461886d2622","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-438415c185832786","oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-4b88eb2520f8cc22","oil-4bd4c6831e9c7077","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-5413f17944743156","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-63f43befc46e25fa","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-7269f661e72c703f","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-86a403aef71f924e","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-94951aba738c80b3","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-9f582ea75e0eddfb","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-b434a85e1e9196d0","oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","oil-c2fa50179af284f7","oil-c4d815318f8299b0","oil-c94e003c369b3450","oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","oil-d479413f1e610f85","oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","oil-e1cd585e16b9635b","oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","oil-e72f16ac2686175c","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f1693a0670f7b784","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-fba2e5ff157abb74","oil-fc714f38909e4348","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5"],"ontology_types":["fflo:DetectionMethod","fflo:Inspection","fflo:InspectionMethod","fkg:DetectionMethod","fkg:Inspection","fso:Analysis","fso:DetectionMethod","fso:Inspection","fso:RegulatoryAction","inspection","regulatory_inspection"],"aliases":["in-depth examination","inspection","lab inspection","regulatory inspection","regulatory_inspection","routine_inspection","surprise inspection","visual inspection","visual_inspection"]},{"id":"detection_methods:entry:regulatory-field-detection:raid-or-search","name":"Raid or search","definition":"An enforcement visit or search of premises.","occurrences":25,"article_count":25,"event_count":25,"article_ids":["oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0","oil-1852e8a212bd5903","oil-1c3f4e35a1252449","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-7ced813eb9eb1314","oil-7ed3f9582cae741d","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-a9685f88d15906f6","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-c1a2f95596a3b00d","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-ce4031737a7654b3","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-fcda56b4bb45ffd3"],"ontology_types":["fflo:DetectionMethod","fflo:EnforcementAction","fflo:Inspection","fflo:RegulatoryAction","fkg:PoliceRaid","fkg:RegulatoryAction","fso:DetectionMethod"],"aliases":["cordon and search","enforcement_raids","Operation Oil","police raid","raid","raids","regulatory raid","surprise raid","vigilance raid"]},{"id":"detection_methods:entry:regulatory-field-detection:other-enforcement-detection","name":"Other enforcement detection","definition":"A normalized detection methods concept combining 13 extracted labels.","occurrences":16,"article_count":16,"event_count":16,"article_ids":["oil-05aa031a4b58524e","oil-0d7b13a282f9b466","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-63426d939d718e7f","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-a882a3e8b7aeb487","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-f5b6386895404f0b","oil-f96a10806285c261","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9","oil-ff34df409a4806f1"],"ontology_types":["fflo:DetectionMethod","fflo:EnforcementAction","fflo:FieldTest","fflo:LaboratoryTest","fflo:Seizure","fkg:DetectionMethod","fso:Inspection"],"aliases":["clinical diagnosis","Food Safety on Wheels (FSW) test","industry_insider_report","internal probe","law enforcement action","market vigil","medical investigation","medical_officer_statement","on-site testing","regulatory_action","regulatory_seizure","seizure","test for other miscible oil"]}]},{"id":"detection_methods:group:complaint-and-intelligence-detection","name":"Complaint and intelligence detection","definition":"Complaints, tips, whistleblowers, intelligence, or public media reports.","occurrences":21,"article_count":20,"event_count":21,"article_ids":["oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-66b89ef48f4536a9","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-a0831d014f72baf3","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-fc5474312cf8529f"],"entries":[{"id":"detection_methods:entry:complaint-and-intelligence-detection:complaint","name":"Complaint","definition":"A normalized detection methods concept combining 2 extracted labels.","occurrences":11,"article_count":11,"event_count":11,"article_ids":["oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-a0831d014f72baf3","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-fc5474312cf8529f"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Complaint","fflo:DetectionMethod","fkg:DetectionMethod","fso:DetectionMethod"],"aliases":["complaint","complaints"]},{"id":"detection_methods:entry:complaint-and-intelligence-detection:tip-off-or-intelligence","name":"Tip-off or intelligence","definition":"A normalized detection methods concept combining 7 extracted labels.","occurrences":10,"article_count":9,"event_count":10,"article_ids":["oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-66b89ef48f4536a9","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8"],"ontology_types":["fflo:DetectionMethod","fflo:TipOff"],"aliases":["intelligence","intelligence_based","social media video","tip","tip off","tip-off","whistleblower report"]}]},{"id":"detection_methods:group:laboratory-and-analytical-detection","name":"Laboratory and analytical detection","definition":"Sampling, laboratory analysis, mobile testing, or other analytical methods.","occurrences":19,"article_count":18,"event_count":18,"article_ids":["oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-42c4efcdce45e35d","oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-bd1df718191f8f6e","oil-c0e8fd0149fa83c4","oil-c72d68cafd2478be","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"entries":[{"id":"detection_methods:entry:laboratory-and-analytical-detection:laboratory-or-analytical-testing","name":"Laboratory or analytical testing","definition":"A normalized detection methods concept combining 10 extracted labels.","occurrences":13,"article_count":12,"event_count":12,"article_ids":["oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-42c4efcdce45e35d","oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"ontology_types":["fflo:DetectionMethod","fflo:LabTest","fflo:LabTesting","fso:Analysis","fso:TestingMethod"],"aliases":["acid value test","lab test","lab_testing","laboratory testing","laboratory_testing","mobile food testing laboratory","nature of oil test","preliminary analysis","routine surveillance and laboratory testing","state food lab testing"]},{"id":"detection_methods:entry:laboratory-and-analytical-detection:sampling","name":"Sampling","definition":"A normalized detection methods concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":4,"article_count":4,"event_count":4,"article_ids":["oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-bd1df718191f8f6e","oil-c0e8fd0149fa83c4"],"ontology_types":["fflo:DetectionMethod","fkg:DetectionMethod","fso:Sampling"],"aliases":["sampling"]},{"id":"detection_methods:entry:laboratory-and-analytical-detection:on-site-or-mobile-testing","name":"On-site or mobile testing","definition":"A normalized detection methods concept combining 2 extracted labels.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-c72d68cafd2478be"],"ontology_types":["fflo:FieldTest"],"aliases":["Food Safety on Wheels (FSW) mobile testing unit","on-the-spot testing"]}]},{"id":"detection_methods:group:survey-and-surveillance-detection","name":"Survey and surveillance detection","definition":"Organized market surveys, surveillance, or monitoring programmes.","occurrences":6,"article_count":6,"event_count":6,"article_ids":["oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-846611108e27fafb","oil-8e1ede70f7533502","oil-9c21da748413e6f9","oil-fc5474312cf8529f"],"entries":[{"id":"detection_methods:entry:survey-and-surveillance-detection:survey-or-surveillance","name":"Survey or surveillance","definition":"A normalized detection methods concept combining 5 extracted labels.","occurrences":6,"article_count":6,"event_count":6,"article_ids":["oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-846611108e27fafb","oil-8e1ede70f7533502","oil-9c21da748413e6f9","oil-fc5474312cf8529f"],"ontology_types":["fflo:DetectionMethod","fflo:Surveillance","fflo:SurveyAggregated","fkg:DetectionMethod"],"aliases":["all-India sample survey","food safety department survey","market_report","routine_market_survey","surveillance"]}]},{"id":"detection_methods:group:specialist-or-documentary-review","name":"Specialist or documentary review","definition":"Company, record, medical-history, or other specialist examination.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77"],"entries":[{"id":"detection_methods:entry:specialist-or-documentary-review:specialist-or-documentary-review","name":"Specialist or documentary review","definition":"A normalized detection methods concept combining 2 extracted labels.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77"],"ontology_types":["fflo:DetectionMethod","fkg:DetectionMethod"],"aliases":["company_examination","medical history review"]}]}]},{"id":"ontology_predicates","label":"Ontology relationships","description":"FFLO or provenance predicates appearing in retained article triplets.","groups":[{"id":"ontology_predicates:group:food-composition-and-adulteration","name":"Food composition and adulteration","definition":"Relationships describing food identity, composition, adulterants, fraud, and substitution.","occurrences":247,"article_count":92,"event_count":92,"article_ids":["oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-055a850c7fce9512","oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-081117bbf714a215","oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-13fd5c31e278a577","oil-156fd0980ec51fe6","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-23d97461886d2622","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-42c4efcdce45e35d","oil-438415c185832786","oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-4b88eb2520f8cc22","oil-4bd4c6831e9c7077","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-5413f17944743156","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-63426d939d718e7f","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-7ced813eb9eb1314","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-846611108e27fafb","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-86a403aef71f924e","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-a0831d014f72baf3","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","oil-c2fa50179af284f7","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-c94e003c369b3450","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-ce4031737a7654b3","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-d276b566dce62194","oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f1693a0670f7b784","oil-f5b6386895404f0b","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-fc5474312cf8529f","oil-fc714f38909e4348","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9","oil-ff34df409a4806f1"],"entries":[{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:food-composition-and-adulteration:fflo-hasadulterant","name":"fflo:hasAdulterant","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":91,"article_count":52,"event_count":52,"article_ids":["oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-081117bbf714a215","oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-13fd5c31e278a577","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-438415c185832786","oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-63426d939d718e7f","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-7ced813eb9eb1314","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-846611108e27fafb","oil-86a403aef71f924e","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","oil-c2fa50179af284f7","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-ce4031737a7654b3","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-d276b566dce62194","oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba","oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-f5b6386895404f0b","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-fc5474312cf8529f","oil-fc714f38909e4348","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9","oil-ff34df409a4806f1"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:hasAdulterant"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:food-composition-and-adulteration:fflo-hasfraudtype","name":"fflo:hasFraudType","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":49,"article_count":33,"event_count":33,"article_ids":["oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-156fd0980ec51fe6","oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-4bd4c6831e9c7077","oil-5413f17944743156","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-63426d939d718e7f","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9","oil-ff34df409a4806f1"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:hasFraudType"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:food-composition-and-adulteration:fflo-belongstocategory","name":"fflo:belongsToCategory","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":42,"article_count":23,"event_count":23,"article_ids":["oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-23d97461886d2622","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-42c4efcdce45e35d","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-63426d939d718e7f","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-ce4031737a7654b3","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f1693a0670f7b784","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:belongsToCategory"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:food-composition-and-adulteration:fflo-hasadulterationmethod","name":"fflo:hasAdulterationMethod","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":29,"article_count":21,"event_count":21,"article_ids":["oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-055a850c7fce9512","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-63426d939d718e7f","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-7ced813eb9eb1314","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:hasAdulterationMethod"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:food-composition-and-adulteration:fflo-issubstitutefor","name":"fflo:isSubstituteFor","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":18,"article_count":15,"event_count":15,"article_ids":["oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-ff34df409a4806f1"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:isSubstituteFor"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:food-composition-and-adulteration:fflo-hasintentionality","name":"fflo:hasIntentionality","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":6,"article_count":6,"event_count":6,"article_ids":["oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:hasIntentionality"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:food-composition-and-adulteration:fkg-hasingredient","name":"fkg:hasIngredient","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":8,"article_count":6,"event_count":6,"article_ids":["oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-a0831d014f72baf3","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-d2df8ab69303fb55"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fkg:hasIngredient"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:food-composition-and-adulteration:fflo-constitutes","name":"fflo:constitutes","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["oil-4b88eb2520f8cc22","oil-c94e003c369b3450"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:constitutes"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:food-composition-and-adulteration:fflo-hasingredient","name":"fflo:hasIngredient","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:hasIngredient"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:food-composition-and-adulteration:fflo-infood","name":"fflo:inFood","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:inFood"]}]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:group:location-and-supply-chain","name":"Location and supply chain","definition":"Relationships linking a claim to place, region, production, or supply-chain stage.","occurrences":197,"article_count":89,"event_count":89,"article_ids":["oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-055a850c7fce9512","oil-05aa031a4b58524e","oil-081117bbf714a215","oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-0d7b13a282f9b466","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","oil-13fd5c31e278a577","oil-1852e8a212bd5903","oil-1c3f4e35a1252449","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-23d97461886d2622","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-438415c185832786","oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-7269f661e72c703f","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-7ed3f9582cae741d","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-846611108e27fafb","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-9c21da748413e6f9","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-a9685f88d15906f6","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","oil-bd1df718191f8f6e","oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","oil-c2fa50179af284f7","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-c72d68cafd2478be","oil-c94e003c369b3450","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-d276b566dce62194","oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","oil-e72f16ac2686175c","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f1693a0670f7b784","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-f96a10806285c261","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-fba2e5ff157abb74","oil-fc5474312cf8529f","oil-fc714f38909e4348","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"entries":[{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:location-and-supply-chain:fflo-foundatstep","name":"fflo:foundAtStep","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":50,"article_count":35,"event_count":35,"article_ids":["oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-055a850c7fce9512","oil-081117bbf714a215","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","oil-13fd5c31e278a577","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-a9685f88d15906f6","oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","oil-c2fa50179af284f7","oil-c72d68cafd2478be","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-e72f16ac2686175c","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f1693a0670f7b784","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-fba2e5ff157abb74","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:foundAtStep"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:location-and-supply-chain:fflo-inregion","name":"fflo:inRegion","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":34,"article_count":27,"event_count":27,"article_ids":["oil-05aa031a4b58524e","oil-0d7b13a282f9b466","oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","oil-13fd5c31e278a577","oil-1852e8a212bd5903","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-23d97461886d2622","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","oil-bd1df718191f8f6e","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-d276b566dce62194","oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-f96a10806285c261","oil-fc5474312cf8529f"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:inRegion"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:location-and-supply-chain:fflo-foundat","name":"fflo:foundAt","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":35,"article_count":25,"event_count":25,"article_ids":["oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-9c21da748413e6f9","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:foundAt"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:location-and-supply-chain:fflo-collectedat","name":"fflo:collectedAt","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":19,"article_count":13,"event_count":13,"article_ids":["oil-1c3f4e35a1252449","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-438415c185832786","oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","oil-7ed3f9582cae741d","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","oil-fc714f38909e4348"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:collectedAt"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:location-and-supply-chain:fflo-foundin","name":"fflo:foundIn","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":15,"article_count":11,"event_count":11,"article_ids":["oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-bd1df718191f8f6e","oil-c72d68cafd2478be","oil-c94e003c369b3450","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-fba2e5ff157abb74","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:foundIn"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:location-and-supply-chain:fflo-commonin","name":"fflo:commonIn","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":31,"article_count":10,"event_count":10,"article_ids":["oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-846611108e27fafb","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-d276b566dce62194","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:commonIn"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:location-and-supply-chain:fflo-producedby","name":"fflo:producedBy","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":7,"article_count":5,"event_count":5,"article_ids":["oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-7269f661e72c703f","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","oil-c72d68cafd2478be"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:producedBy"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:location-and-supply-chain:fflo-occursat","name":"fflo:occursAt","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-fc5474312cf8529f"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:occursAt"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:location-and-supply-chain:fflo-outputof","name":"fflo:outputOf","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-e1aa62675070cacd"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:outputOf"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:location-and-supply-chain:fso-haslocation","name":"fso:hasLocation","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fso:hasLocation"]}]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:group:regulation-and-enforcement","name":"Regulation and enforcement","definition":"Relationships describing authorities, targets, actions, standards, and penalties.","occurrences":198,"article_count":86,"event_count":86,"article_ids":["oil-06d5928124689ba0","oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-081117bbf714a215","oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0","oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-1852e8a212bd5903","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-23d97461886d2622","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-42c4efcdce45e35d","oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-438415c185832786","oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-4b88eb2520f8cc22","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-63f43befc46e25fa","oil-66b89ef48f4536a9","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-7ced813eb9eb1314","oil-7ed3f9582cae741d","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-9c21da748413e6f9","oil-9f582ea75e0eddfb","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-a882a3e8b7aeb487","oil-a9685f88d15906f6","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-b434a85e1e9196d0","oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-bd1df718191f8f6e","oil-c0e8fd0149fa83c4","oil-c1a2f95596a3b00d","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-c4d815318f8299b0","oil-c72d68cafd2478be","oil-c94e003c369b3450","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","oil-d479413f1e610f85","oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba","oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","oil-e1cd585e16b9635b","oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","oil-e72f16ac2686175c","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-fba2e5ff157abb74","oil-fc5474312cf8529f","oil-fc714f38909e4348","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"entries":[{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:regulation-and-enforcement:fflo-issuedby","name":"fflo:issuedBy","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":76,"article_count":53,"event_count":53,"article_ids":["oil-06d5928124689ba0","oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0","oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-42c4efcdce45e35d","oil-438415c185832786","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-4b88eb2520f8cc22","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-63f43befc46e25fa","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-7ced813eb9eb1314","oil-7ed3f9582cae741d","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-9f582ea75e0eddfb","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-b434a85e1e9196d0","oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-bd1df718191f8f6e","oil-c0e8fd0149fa83c4","oil-c1a2f95596a3b00d","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-c4d815318f8299b0","oil-c72d68cafd2478be","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","oil-d479413f1e610f85","oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","oil-e1cd585e16b9635b","oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","oil-e72f16ac2686175c","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-fba2e5ff157abb74","oil-fc5474312cf8529f","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:issuedBy"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:regulation-and-enforcement:fflo-targets","name":"fflo:targets","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":55,"article_count":34,"event_count":34,"article_ids":["oil-081117bbf714a215","oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-23d97461886d2622","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-438415c185832786","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-63f43befc46e25fa","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-7ced813eb9eb1314","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-a882a3e8b7aeb487","oil-a9685f88d15906f6","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-bd1df718191f8f6e","oil-c0e8fd0149fa83c4","oil-c1a2f95596a3b00d","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-c4d815318f8299b0","oil-c72d68cafd2478be","oil-d479413f1e610f85","oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","oil-e1cd585e16b9635b","oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:targets"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:regulation-and-enforcement:fso-isperformedat","name":"fso:isPerformedAt","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":22,"article_count":15,"event_count":15,"article_ids":["oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-c0e8fd0149fa83c4","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fso:isPerformedAt"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:regulation-and-enforcement:fso-isperformedon","name":"fso:isPerformedOn","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":16,"article_count":15,"event_count":15,"article_ids":["oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-1852e8a212bd5903","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-66b89ef48f4536a9","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-c1a2f95596a3b00d","oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-fc714f38909e4348"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fso:isPerformedOn"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:regulation-and-enforcement:fflo-triggeredaction","name":"fflo:triggeredAction","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":12,"article_count":12,"event_count":12,"article_ids":["oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-bd1df718191f8f6e","oil-c94e003c369b3450","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:triggeredAction"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:regulation-and-enforcement:fflo-appliestofood","name":"fflo:appliesToFood","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":6,"article_count":6,"event_count":6,"article_ids":["oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-63f43befc46e25fa","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-9c21da748413e6f9","oil-c3728ff063420cf8"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:appliesToFood"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:regulation-and-enforcement:fflo-appliesto","name":"fflo:appliesTo","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":4,"article_count":3,"event_count":3,"article_ids":["oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:appliesTo"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:regulation-and-enforcement:fflo-complieswith","name":"fflo:compliesWith","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":5,"article_count":3,"event_count":3,"article_ids":["oil-9c21da748413e6f9","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-af3a540365afc7c2"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:compliesWith"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:regulation-and-enforcement:fflo-triggerspenalty","name":"fflo:triggersPenalty","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-42c4efcdce45e35d"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:triggersPenalty"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:regulation-and-enforcement:fflo-violates","name":"fflo:violates","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-c94e003c369b3450"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:violates"]}]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:group:evidence-detection-and-provenance","name":"Evidence, detection, and provenance","definition":"Relationships describing evidence, detection, attribution, and provenance.","occurrences":112,"article_count":58,"event_count":58,"article_ids":["oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0","oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","oil-156fd0980ec51fe6","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-63426d939d718e7f","oil-66b89ef48f4536a9","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-7269f661e72c703f","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-846611108e27fafb","oil-86a403aef71f924e","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-a0831d014f72baf3","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-c72d68cafd2478be","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-c94e003c369b3450","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-d276b566dce62194","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f1693a0670f7b784","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","oil-fcda56b4bb45ffd3","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5"],"entries":[{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:evidence-detection-and-provenance:prov-wasassociatedwith","name":"prov:wasAssociatedWith","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":39,"article_count":28,"event_count":28,"article_ids":["oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0","oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","oil-156fd0980ec51fe6","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-66b89ef48f4536a9","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-86a403aef71f924e","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f1693a0670f7b784","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["prov:wasAssociatedWith"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:evidence-detection-and-provenance:prov-used","name":"prov:used","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":32,"article_count":22,"event_count":22,"article_ids":["oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-156fd0980ec51fe6","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-7269f661e72c703f","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-fcda56b4bb45ffd3"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["prov:used"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:evidence-detection-and-provenance:prov-wasattributedto","name":"prov:wasAttributedTo","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":12,"article_count":9,"event_count":9,"article_ids":["oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-a0831d014f72baf3","oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","oil-c72d68cafd2478be","oil-c94e003c369b3450","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["prov:wasAttributedTo"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:evidence-detection-and-provenance:fflo-producesindicator","name":"fflo:producesIndicator","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":17,"article_count":6,"event_count":6,"article_ids":["oil-63426d939d718e7f","oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","oil-c94e003c369b3450","oil-d276b566dce62194","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:producesIndicator"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:evidence-detection-and-provenance:fflo-detectedby","name":"fflo:detectedBy","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":4,"article_count":4,"event_count":4,"article_ids":["oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-d276b566dce62194","oil-d7ec006e22e070de"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:detectedBy"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:evidence-detection-and-provenance:fflo-identifies","name":"fflo:identifies","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":3,"article_count":3,"event_count":3,"article_ids":["oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-846611108e27fafb","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:identifies"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:evidence-detection-and-provenance:fflo-supportedby","name":"fflo:supportedBy","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-a0831d014f72baf3"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:supportedBy"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:evidence-detection-and-provenance:fflo-confirmedby","name":"fflo:confirmedBy","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-2f0a177eecae442b"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:confirmedBy"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:evidence-detection-and-provenance:fflo-hasvalue","name":"fflo:hasValue","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:hasValue"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:evidence-detection-and-provenance:fso-isresultof","name":"fso:isResultOf","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-4d6bfb72c0733299"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fso:isResultOf"]}]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:group:health-and-effects","name":"Health and effects","definition":"Relationships describing effects, indicators, and health consequences.","occurrences":63,"article_count":17,"event_count":17,"article_ids":["oil-06d5928124689ba0","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-8e1ede70f7533502","oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77","oil-a0831d014f72baf3","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-d276b566dce62194","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-f96a10806285c261","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"entries":[{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:health-and-effects:fflo-causeseffect","name":"fflo:causesEffect","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":56,"article_count":16,"event_count":16,"article_ids":["oil-06d5928124689ba0","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-8e1ede70f7533502","oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-d276b566dce62194","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-f96a10806285c261","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:causesEffect"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:health-and-effects:fflo-haseffecttype","name":"fflo:hasEffectType","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":7,"article_count":6,"event_count":6,"article_ids":["oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-a0831d014f72baf3","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:hasEffectType"]}]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:group:other-or-schema-review","name":"Other or schema review","definition":"Relationships outside the main families, including explicit schema mismatches.","occurrences":12,"article_count":12,"event_count":12,"article_ids":["oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-42c4efcdce45e35d","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-c94e003c369b3450","oil-d276b566dce62194","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-e1cd585e16b9635b","oil-f5b6386895404f0b","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"entries":[{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:other-or-schema-review:fflo-hasdefinition","name":"fflo:hasDefinition","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":3,"article_count":3,"event_count":3,"article_ids":["oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-f5b6386895404f0b"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:hasDefinition"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:other-or-schema-review:lkif-created-by","name":"lkif:created_by","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-c94e003c369b3450"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["lkif:created_by"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:other-or-schema-review:fflo-affectspopulation","name":"fflo:affectsPopulation","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:affectsPopulation"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:other-or-schema-review:fflo-associatedwith","name":"fflo:associatedWith","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-d276b566dce62194"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:associatedWith"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:other-or-schema-review:fflo-contactnumber","name":"fflo:contactNumber","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-42c4efcdce45e35d"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:contactNumber"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:other-or-schema-review:fflo-defines","name":"fflo:defines","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-e1cd585e16b9635b"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:defines"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:other-or-schema-review:fflo-haspermissiblelimit","name":"fflo:hasPermissibleLimit","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:hasPermissibleLimit"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:other-or-schema-review:fflo-requireskit","name":"fflo:requiresKit","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-daf4ca29b4849989"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:requiresKit"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:other-or-schema-review:schema-mismatch","name":"SCHEMA_MISMATCH","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-b96369f55af40397"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["SCHEMA_MISMATCH"]}]}]}]},"articles":[{"article_id":"oil-e72f16ac2686175c","slug":"oil-e72f16ac2686175c","title":"Unsafe cooking oil, pungent smell found at KFC in Hyderabad","source":"siasat.com","date":"2026-06-21","url":"https://www.siasat.com/unsafe-cooking-oil-pungent-smell-found-at-kfc-in-hyderabad-3493459/","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.2169901507946016,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["cooking oil"],"issue_types":["unsafe_food","substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["improvement notice"],"locations":["Hyderabad, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Hyderabad: A food safety inspection at a Hyderabad KFC outlet in Nizampet on Saturday, June 20, uncovered several food safety violations, like unsafe cooking oil, a pungent smell in the kitchen and raw chicken stored...","search_text":"$10"},{"article_id":"oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","slug":"oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","title":"Daltonganj police seize spurious edible oil | Ranchi News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-06-18","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/ranchi/daltonganj-police-seize-spurious-edible-oil/articleshow/131829588.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8344556416851237,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["Edible Oils"],"issue_types":["counterfeit","substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["case registration","seizure"],"locations":["Daltonganj, Jharkhand, India"],"primary_state":"Jharkhand","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"Daltonganj: A network involved in selling spurious edible oil of a popular brand was busted and 138 boxes, containing 1,776 litres, seized from a godown near Bairya Chowk late Wednesday night, police said. Sources also...","search_text":"$11"},{"article_id":"oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","slug":"oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","title":"FDA Crackdown On Adulterated & Banned Food In Vasai-Virar: 18 Shops Sealed, ₹14 Lakh Worth Goods Confiscated","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2026-06-15","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/mumbai/fda-crackdown-on-adulterated-banned-food-in-vasai-virar-18-shops-sealed-14-lakh-worth-goods-confiscated","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.92,"classifier_label":"$undefined","classifier_score":"$undefined","classifier_model":"$undefined","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","contamination"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","sealing"],"locations":["Vasai-Virar, Palghar, Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Vasai: Following strict directives from Tukaram Mundhe, Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), a massive crackdown has been launched against adulterated and banned food products within the jurisdiction...","search_text":"$12"},{"article_id":"oil-d276b566dce62194","slug":"oil-d276b566dce62194","title":"This toxic adulterant in edible oils can damage your nervous system: Here's how to check if your cooking oil is safe","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-06-11","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/etimes/wellness/this-toxic-adulterant-in-edible-oils-can-damage-your-nervous-system-heres-how-to-check-if-your-cooking-oil-is-safe/photostory/131653846.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.3559,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["mustard oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","contamination"],"adulterants":[],"actions":[],"locations":["Delhi, India"],"primary_state":"Delhi","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":17,"excerpt":"Most people worry about calories when they reach for their cooking oil. Very few think to worry about paralysis. But there is a chemical adulterant that has caused mass poisoning events across multiple continents, left...","search_text":"$13"},{"article_id":"oil-c4d815318f8299b0","slug":"oil-c4d815318f8299b0","title":"Maharashtra FDA Cracks Down On Gutkha And Unsafe Food; 33 Arrested, Goods Worth Over ₹8.56 Crore Seized","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2026-06-09","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/mumbai/maharashtra-fda-cracks-down-on-gutkha-and-unsafe-food-33-arrested-goods-worth-over-856-crore-seized","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"$undefined","classifier_score":"$undefined","classifier_model":"$undefined","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","unsafe_food"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":0,"excerpt":"Mumbai, June 9: The Maharashtra Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has continued its statewide crackdown against banned gutkha, pan masala and unsafe food products, resulting in the arrest of 33 persons, sealing of 19...","search_text":"$14"},{"article_id":"oil-055a850c7fce9512","slug":"oil-055a850c7fce9512","title":"Articles worth over Rs 15.8 lakh seized by FDA in week long raids","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-06-05","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/nashik/articles-worth-over-rs-15-8-lakh-seized-by-fda-in-week-long-raids/articleshow/131537623.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"$undefined","classifier_score":"$undefined","classifier_model":"$undefined","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["soybean oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","unsafe_food"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Chandwad, Nashik, Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Nashik: The Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) has launched a crackdown on food business operators across Nashik district to ensure consumers receive safe, unadulterated and quality food products. As part of the drive...","search_text":"$15"},{"article_id":"oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","slug":"oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","title":"Nashik: FDA Seizes Suspected And Illegal Food Stock Worth ₹15.89 Lakh In Week-Long Crackdown","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2026-06-04","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/pune/nashik-fda-seizes-suspected-and-illegal-food-stock-worth-1589-lakh-in-week-long-crackdown","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"$undefined","classifier_score":"$undefined","classifier_model":"$undefined","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["soybean oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","unsafe_food"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Chandwad, Nashik, Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"Nashik: The Food and Drug Administration (FDA), Nashik Division, has launched a special campaign to ensure that citizens have access to pure, authentic, and nutritious food products. Under this campaign, during the...","search_text":"$16"},{"article_id":"oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","slug":"oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","title":"Nashik FDA confiscates food items worth over Rs 1 lakh on suspicion of adulteration","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-05-30","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/nashik/nashik-fda-confiscates-food-items-worth-over-rs-1-lakh-on-suspicion-of-adulteration/articleshow/131414371.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"$undefined","classifier_score":"$undefined","classifier_model":"$undefined","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["soyabean oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Nashik, Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Nashik: Food articles worth over ₹1 lakh were seized in a series of raids carried out by the Nashik Food and Drug Administration (FDA) across multiple locations on May 27, targeting suspected adulterated and unlicensed...","search_text":"$17"},{"article_id":"oil-af3a540365afc7c2","slug":"oil-af3a540365afc7c2","title":"Food safety raids at Hyderabad bakery, brewery uncover expired food, pest infestation, hygiene violations","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2026-05-21","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Hyderabad/food-safety-raids-at-hyderabad-bakery-brewery-uncover-expired-food-pest-infestation-hygiene-violations/article71003523.ece","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.3251,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["cooking oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["reused cooking oil"],"actions":["necessary action"],"locations":["Hyderabad, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"Food safety inspections conducted by the Telangana Food Safety department at a bakery and a brewery in Hyderabad’s Nagole area on Wednesday (May 20) uncovered serious hygiene and food safety violations, with officials...","search_text":"$18"},{"article_id":"oil-1c3f4e35a1252449","slug":"oil-1c3f4e35a1252449","title":"4,000 litres of suspected adulterated oil seized | Kanpur News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-05-17","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/kanpur/4000-litres-of-suspected-adulterated-oil-seized/articleshow/131143712.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.9218017301463708,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","custody"],"locations":["Kanpur, Kanpur Dehat, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Kanpur: Police seized around 4,000 litres of suspected adulterated edible oil during a raid near Mantora Bridge in industrial area of Kanpur Dehat on Friday. According to police, the raid was carried out after...","search_text":"$19"},{"article_id":"oil-c94e003c369b3450","slug":"oil-c94e003c369b3450","title":"Hyderabad: Food safety inspection flags unsafe oil at KFC outlet in Kondapur","source":"siasat.com","date":"2026-05-05","url":"https://www.siasat.com/hyderabad-food-safety-inspection-flags-unsafe-oil-at-kfc-outlet-in-kondapur-3465689/","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.4695679377765578,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["cooking oil"],"issue_types":["unsafe_food","substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["Action is being initiated against the outlet"],"locations":["Hyderabad, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Hyderabad: A food safety inspection has flagged violations related to cooking oil quality at a KFC outlet in Kondapur. According to food safety authorities, a team conducted a random inspection at the outlet located in...","search_text":"$1a"},{"article_id":"oil-42c4efcdce45e35d","slug":"oil-42c4efcdce45e35d","title":"Food safety administration flags substandard food products","source":"nagalandpost.com","date":"2026-04-29","url":"https://nagalandpost.com/food-safety-administration-flags-substandard-food-products/","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.2974,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["Mast Health Multi-source Edible Oil"],"issue_types":["substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["public notice","legal proceedings"],"locations":["Dimapur, Nagaland, India"],"primary_state":"Nagaland","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Food Safety Administration, Dimapur Zone (Dimapur, Niuland, Chumoukedima, Mon and Peren) has issued a public notice identifying several food products as substandard following routine surveillance and laboratory testing...","search_text":"$1b"},{"article_id":"oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","slug":"oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","title":"Cyberabad food adulteration raids Hyderabad Rs 64 lakh seizure 28 arrested","source":"indiatoday.in","date":"2026-04-23","url":"https://www.indiatoday.in/cities/hyderabad/story/cyberabad-food-adulteration-raids-hyderabad-rs-64-lakh-seizure-28-arrested-2900680-2026-04-23","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.9327,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Hyderabad, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Food adulteration racket busted in Hyderabad; oil, namkeen worth lakhs seized Sources revealed that the police had major success in seizing 5,026 litres of oil and 5,192 kilograms of wheat during the operation, which...","search_text":"$1c"},{"article_id":"oil-fcda56b4bb45ffd3","slug":"oil-fcda56b4bb45ffd3","title":"Cyberabad Cops Book 28, Seize Adulterated Food Worth Rs 64 Lakh","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2026-04-22","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/telangana/cyberabad-cops-book-28-seize-adulterated-food-worth-rs-64-lakh-1952140","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"$undefined","classifier_score":"$undefined","classifier_model":"$undefined","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["booking of persons","seizure of goods"],"locations":["Cyberabad, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Cyberabad Police said strict action will continue against offenders to ensure food safety and protect public health. Hyderabad: Cyberabad Enforcement Wing along with the Special Operations Team (SOT) booked 28 persons...","search_text":"$1d"},{"article_id":"oil-ce4031737a7654b3","slug":"oil-ce4031737a7654b3","title":"22 cases booked in Cyberabad food adulteration crackdown, ₹64 lakh worth goods seized","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2026-04-22","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Hyderabad/22-cases-booked-in-cyberabad-food-adulteration-crackdown-64-lakh-worth-goods-seized/article70892711.ece","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.9433,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["case_booked","seizure"],"locations":["Cyberabad, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":0,"excerpt":"A total of 28 individuals were arrested, and 22 cases were booked by the Cyberabad Enforcement Wing during a series of raids conducted between January 1 and April 21, 2026, targeting food adulteration and illegal food...","search_text":"$1e"},{"article_id":"oil-c0e8fd0149fa83c4","slug":"oil-c0e8fd0149fa83c4","title":"Food Adulteration: Barnala admin imposes Rs 2L fine","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-04-12","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/chandigarh/food-adulteration-barnala-admin-imposes-rs-2l-fine/articleshow/130198058.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"$undefined","classifier_score":"$undefined","classifier_model":"$undefined","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["mustard oil","cooking oil"],"issue_types":["substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["Rs 2.25 lakh fine"],"locations":["Barnala, Punjab, India"],"primary_state":"Punjab","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Bathinda: The Barnala district administration has imposed a fine amounting to Rs 2.25 lakh in seven cases of selling substandard food products. The fines were imposed under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. These...","search_text":"$1f"},{"article_id":"oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","slug":"oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","title":"Expired Mustard Oil Seized in Hazaribag Food Safety Raid | Ranchi News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-04-07","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/ranchi/expired-mustard-oil-seized-in-hazaribag-food-safety-raid/articleshow/130094279.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.7962744115817022,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["mustard oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","prohibited_additive"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","legal action"],"locations":["Hazaribag, Jharkhand, India"],"primary_state":"Jharkhand","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"Hazaribag: Acting on directives of DC Shashi Prakash Singh and additional chief medical officer Dr Shashi Jaiswal, a food safety team conducted a surprise raid at a Barhi-based business firm on Tuesday, uncovering a...","search_text":"$20"},{"article_id":"oil-97103cc7b062d80c","slug":"oil-97103cc7b062d80c","title":"Over 5,000 litres of adulterated cooking oil seized in Gachibowli; expired wheat flour repackaged for sale","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2026-03-10","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Hyderabad/over-5000-litres-of-adulterated-cooking-oil-seized-in-gachibowli-expired-wheat-flour-repackaged-for-sale/article70724996.ece","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.921465990480022,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["cooking oil","soybean oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["expired cooking oil"],"actions":["seizure","raid"],"locations":["Hyderabad, Gachibowli, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"Thousands of litres of adulterated cooking oil and wheat flour were seized during raids carried out by the Madhapur Special Operations Team (SOT) at two locations in Hyderabad on Monday (March 9, 2026). The accused were...","search_text":"$21"},{"article_id":"oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","slug":"oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","title":"Adulterated cooking oil, wheat flour worth Rs 21 lakh seized in Hyderabad","source":"siasat.com","date":"2026-03-10","url":"https://www.siasat.com/adulterated-cooking-oil-wheat-flour-worth-rs-21-lakh-seized-in-hyderabad-3432488/","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8719484829011432,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["cooking oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard","mislabeling"],"adulterants":["expired cooking oil"],"actions":["raid","seizure"],"locations":["Hyderabad, Gachibowli, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Hyderabad: The Madhapur Special Operations Team conducted raids at two locations in Hyderabad on Monday, March 9. During the raid, thousands of litres of adulterated cooking oil and wheat flour were seized. In the case,...","search_text":"$22"},{"article_id":"oil-d479413f1e610f85","slug":"oil-d479413f1e610f85","title":"FSDA seizes adulterated food worth  ₹12.34 crore in UP","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2026-03-02","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/cities/lucknow-news/fsda-seizes-adulterated-food-worth-12-34-crore-in-up-101772463235324.html","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.862371830448324,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["Seizure of adulterated food and oil"],"locations":["Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"FSDA seizes adulterated food worth ₹12.34 crore in UP VP Singh, FSDA assistant commissioner, said strict action is being taken against those involved in misbranding, adulteration and sale of substandard food products....","search_text":"$23"},{"article_id":"oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","slug":"oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","title":"Kanpur Adulterated Food: Pre-Holi raids in Kanpur: FSDA seizes 9 quintals of adulterated mawa & edible oil worth Rs 29L | Kanpur News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-02-26","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/kanpur/9-quintals-of-adulterated-mawa-edible-oil-seized-ahead-of-holi/articleshow/128794157.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8388143717855862,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["unspecified adulterant"],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":10,"excerpt":"KANPUR: In a crackdown on food adulteration ahead of Holi, the Food Security and Drug Administration (FSDA) department on Wednesday seized adulterated mawa and edible oil worth Rs 29.08 lakh and destroyed a large...","search_text":"$24"},{"article_id":"oil-1852e8a212bd5903","slug":"oil-1852e8a212bd5903","title":"Holi Crackdown: 30,000 Oil Packs Seized, Tonnes Of Fake Paneer Destroyed Across Uttar Pradesh","source":"businesstoday.in","date":"2026-02-26","url":"https://www.businesstoday.in/bt-tv/whats-hot/video/holi-crackdown-30000-oil-packs-seized-tonnes-of-fake-paneer-destroyed-across-uttar-pradesh-518082-2026-02-26?utm_source=rssfeed","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.4750736034499782,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Kanpur Dehat, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Ahead of Holi, authorities in Uttar Pradesh have intensified a statewide crackdown on adulterated food items to ensure festive food safety. Food Safety teams conducted raids across multiple districts, targeting fake...","search_text":"$25"},{"article_id":"oil-898a1362002b727d","slug":"oil-898a1362002b727d","title":"Food safety teams seize adulterated khoya in Agra, edible oil in Mânagar | Agra News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-02-22","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/agra/food-safety-teams-seize-adulterated-khoya-in-agra-edible-oil-in-mnagar/articleshow/128652372.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.929834459709838,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil","mustard oil","rice bran oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["colouring material"],"actions":["seizure","premises sealed","criminal proceedings likely"],"locations":["Muzaffarnagar, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":9,"excerpt":"Agra: As part of an ongoing crackdown on food adulteration, authorities seized and destroyed 1,320 kg of adulterated khoya in Agra and confiscated nearly 12,000 litres of adulterated edible oil in Muzaffarnagar over the...","search_text":"$26"},{"article_id":"oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","slug":"oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","title":"Sale of adulterated coconut oil: farmers elated over SHRC’s intervention","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2026-02-19","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/kerala/sale-of-adulterated-coconut-oil-farmers-elated-over-shrcs-intervention/article70651539.ece","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8516265033531835,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["coconut oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":["adulterated coconut oil"],"actions":["urgent inquiry directive"],"locations":["Kozhikode, Kerala, India"],"primary_state":"Kerala","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":8,"excerpt":"Farmers in the upland areas of Kozhikode district have welcomed the intervention of the State Human Rights Commission (SHRC) following complaints regarding the alleged large-scale manufacture and sale of adulterated...","search_text":"$27"},{"article_id":"oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5","slug":"oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5","title":"McDonald’s Outlet In Jaipur Under Scanner After Food Safety Violations Found During Surprise Check; 40 Litres Of Oil & 40 Kgs Rotten Tomatoes Destroyed","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2026-02-11","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/viral/mcdonalds-outlet-in-jaipur-under-scanner-after-food-safety-violations-found-during-surprise-check-40-liters-of-oil-40-kgs-rotten-tomatoes-destroyed","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"$undefined","classifier_score":"$undefined","classifier_model":"$undefined","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["palm oil"],"issue_types":["unsafe_food","substandard"],"adulterants":["Total Polar Compounds"],"actions":["destruction of oil","formal improvement notice"],"locations":["Jaipur, Rajasthan, India"],"primary_state":"Rajasthan","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"Jaipur: In a surprise inspection conducted on Monday, food safety officials from the Rajasthan health department uncovered serious hygiene and food safety lapses at a McDonald’s outlet located in Gaurav Tower, Jaipur....","search_text":"$28"},{"article_id":"oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9","slug":"oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9","title":"The Vitamin D trap: How âfortifiedâ oil poisoned Punjab homes","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-12-29","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/chandigarh/the-vitamin-d-trap-how-fortified-oil-poisoned-punjab-homes/articleshow/126219580.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8302,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["lab_confirmed"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard","mislabeling"],"adulterants":["Vitamin D"],"actions":["court proceedings","public advisories","raids"],"locations":["Rajpura, Patiala, Punjab, India"],"primary_state":"Punjab","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":11,"excerpt":"Chandigarh: A medical investigation spanning the states of Punjab and Kolkata finally uncovered the source of a toxic \"fortified\" oil that left several residents of Punjab in critical condition. Months after TOI...","search_text":"$29"},{"article_id":"oil-d6d2041d0727d059","slug":"oil-d6d2041d0727d059","title":"Inspection throws up health scare in form of expired foods, fake oil | Jaipur News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-12-03","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/jaipur/inspection-throws-up-health-scare-in-form-of-expired-foods-fake-oil/articleshow/125727900.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.7491401562006129,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["groundnut oil"],"issue_types":["counterfeit","substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","sample collection"],"locations":["Jaipur, Rajasthan, India"],"primary_state":"Rajasthan","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Jaipur: Health department food safety officers Tuesday found expired food products stored on racks during an inspection at Amazon Seller Services Pvt Ltd in Jhotwara Industrial Area. The expired items included coriander...","search_text":"$2a"},{"article_id":"oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","slug":"oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","title":"Adulterated paneer and cooking oil seized ahead of Diwali | Agra News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-10-15","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/agra/adulterated-paneer-and-cooking-oil-seized-ahead-of-diwali/articleshow/124586909.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.6272369234416718,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil","mustard oil","refined soybean oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","unsafe_food"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","closure","notice"],"locations":["Agra, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Agra:Ahead of Diwali, officials have stepped up efforts to curb food adulteration. The Food Safety and Drug Administration (FSDA) carried out swift operations across districts to ensure that residents receive safe and...","search_text":"$2b"},{"article_id":"oil-c2fa50179af284f7","slug":"oil-c2fa50179af284f7","title":"Flies hovering on them, 145kg rasgullas destroyed by food safety officials in Noida","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-10-12","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/noida/flies-hovering-on-them-145kg-rasgullas-destroyed-by-food-safety-officials-in-noida/articleshow/124489677.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"$undefined","classifier_score":"$undefined","classifier_model":"$undefined","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["mustard oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Noida, Gautam Buddha Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"Noida: Food safety officials destroyed over 430kg of contaminated sweets and seized over 365kg of adulterated oil in the past two days during the inspections. On Saturday, a team raided a manufacturing unit in Devla,...","search_text":"$2c"},{"article_id":"oil-daf4ca29b4849989","slug":"oil-daf4ca29b4849989","title":"Adulterated edible oil worth Rs53L seized in Kanpur raid | Kanpur News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-10-11","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/kanpur/adulterated-edible-oil-worth-rs53l-seized-in-kanpur-raid/articleshow/124465364.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.9432970113934098,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":["suspicious samples"],"actions":["raid","seizure"],"locations":["Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"Kanpur: The Food Safety and Drug Administration (FSDA) carried out a major raid on Friday at M/s Gayatri Oil Industry in Fazalganj, seizing approximately 35,727 litres of edible oil worth Rs53 lakh after the Food Safety...","search_text":"$2d"},{"article_id":"oil-c72d68cafd2478be","slug":"oil-c72d68cafd2478be","title":"FSDA seizes substandard supply of edible oil worth 30L | Kanpur News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-10-10","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/kanpur/fsda-seizes-substandard-supply-of-edible-oil-worth-30l/articleshow/124437838.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.9652111641380194,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Kanpur: The Food Safety and Drug Administration Department (FSDA) on Thursday seized a large consignment of edible oil of substandard quality and other food items during a citywide inspection drive. According to...","search_text":"$2e"},{"article_id":"oil-081117bbf714a215","slug":"oil-081117bbf714a215","title":"Pre-Diwali crackdown on food adulteration in Lucknow","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2025-10-10","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/cities/lucknow-news/prediwali-crackdown-on-food-adulteration-in-lucknow-101760112550766.html","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"$undefined","classifier_score":"$undefined","classifier_model":"$undefined","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["mustard oil","edible oils"],"issue_types":["substandard","adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Pre-Diwali crackdown on food adulteration in Lucknow Suspicious food products worth ₹6.65 lakh seized, 1,552 kg items valued at ₹2.51 lakh destroyed by Food Safety and Drug Administration LUCKNOW Ahead of Diwali and...","search_text":"$2f"},{"article_id":"oil-23d97461886d2622","slug":"oil-23d97461886d2622","title":"FDA seizes untested soyabean oil","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-10-09","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/nagpur/fda-seizes-untested-soyabean-oil/articleshow/124398090.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"$undefined","classifier_score":"$undefined","classifier_model":"$undefined","event_count":2,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["soyabean oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","unsafe_food"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Nagpur, Maharashtra, India","Gondia, Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Nagpur: With Diwali's festive fervour around the corner, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has launched a crackdown in and around Nagpur on shops selling refined soyabean oil without the mandatory laboratory setup...","search_text":"$30"},{"article_id":"oil-9f582ea75e0eddfb","slug":"oil-9f582ea75e0eddfb","title":"Raids at 8 shops in Gurgaon, 16 food samples seized, sent for tests","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-09-29","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/gurgaon/raids-at-8-shops-in-gurgaon-16-food-samples-seized-sent-for-tests/articleshow/124199612.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"$undefined","classifier_score":"$undefined","classifier_model":"$undefined","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["mustard oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["raids","seizure"],"locations":["Gurgaon, Haryana, India"],"primary_state":"Haryana","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Gurgaon: Amid ongoing Navratri celebrations, the food safety department conducted raids at eight shops, seizing 16 food samples due to safety concerns related to fasting items such as kuttu atta, singhara atta,...","search_text":"$31"},{"article_id":"oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","slug":"oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","title":"14 students of a government school in Hazaribag take ill after consuming snacks , hospitalized","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-09-24","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/ranchi/14-students-of-a-government-school-in-hazaribag-take-ill-after-consuming-snacks-hospitalized/articleshow/124097235.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"$undefined","classifier_score":"$undefined","classifier_model":"$undefined","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["mustard oil"],"issue_types":["contamination","substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["inspection","sample_collection"],"locations":["Hazaribag, Jharkhand, India"],"primary_state":"Jharkhand","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Hazaribag: Fourteen students of Kasturba Gandhi Balika Uchch Vidyalaya fell ill after allegedly consuming contaminated roasted flattened rice during evening snacks on Tuesday. All of them were admitted to the Barhi...","search_text":"$32"},{"article_id":"oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","slug":"oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","title":"Onam vigil: five special squads in action to expose low-quality food products","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2025-09-03","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/kerala/onam-vigil-five-special-squads-in-action-to-expose-low-quality-food-products/article70008118.ece","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.92,"classifier_label":"$undefined","classifier_score":"$undefined","classifier_model":"$undefined","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["coconut oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution","mislabeling"],"adulterants":["testa oil"],"actions":["Action will be initiated soon"],"locations":["Kozhikode, Kerala, India"],"primary_state":"Kerala","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Strengthening its fight against adulteration and unhygienic practices, the Food Safety department has deployed five special squads with mobile lab testing facilities for aggressive checking during the Onam season in...","search_text":"$33"},{"article_id":"oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","slug":"oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","title":"Coconut oil unit sealed in Kanniyakumari for violations","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2025-08-21","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Madurai/coconut-oil-unit-sealed-in-kanniyakumari-for-violations/article69960089.ece","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"$undefined","classifier_score":"$undefined","classifier_model":"$undefined","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["coconut oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard","mislabeling"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["sealing of coconut oil unit","seizure"],"locations":["Kanniyakumari, Tamil Nadu, India"],"primary_state":"Tamil Nadu","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"The Kanniyakumari Food Safety Department has sealed a coconut oil manufacturing unit and a retail shop at Palugal village in Vilavancode taluk for absence of valid licence, labelling violations and suspected...","search_text":"$34"},{"article_id":"oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","slug":"oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","title":"16k litres of fake coconut oil seized | Thiruvananthapuram News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-08-14","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/thiruvananthapuram/16k-litres-of-fake-coconut-oil-seized/articleshow/123288376.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.912246842110634,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["coconut oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit","mislabeling"],"adulterants":["fake coconut oil"],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Kollam, Kerala, India"],"primary_state":"Kerala","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"T'puram: The state govt seized 16,565 litres of coconut oil of suspicious quality in seven districts after the food safety department conducted surprise inspections of production and marketing centres, said health...","search_text":"$35"},{"article_id":"oil-a9685f88d15906f6","slug":"oil-a9685f88d15906f6","title":"Food Safety wing seizes 16,565 litres of spurious coconut oil in raids  ","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2025-08-12","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/kerala/food-safety-wing-seizes-16565-litres-of-spurious-coconut-oil-in-raids/article69925354.ece","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.856106898267018,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["coconut oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["seven districts in Kerala, Kerala, India"],"primary_state":"Kerala","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"In surprise raids conducted at coconut oil manufacturing and trading centres in seven districts in Kerala as part of Operation Life, the Food Safety wing seized 16,565 litres of coconut oil, the quality of which was...","search_text":"Food Safety wing seizes 16,565 litres of spurious coconut oil in raids   thehindu.com In surprise raids conducted at coconut oil manufacturing and trading centres in seven districts in Kerala as part of Operation Life, the Food Safety wing seized 16,565 litres of coconut oil, the quality of which was suspect.\nThe surprise raids were conducted by the Food Safety wing following a glut of complaints about substandard coconut oil flooding the market, now that the price of coconut oil in the open market has skyrocketed.\nPublished - August 12, 2025 09:37 pm IST coconut oil substandard adulteration seizure suspected seven districts in Kerala, Kerala, India seizure of 16,565 litres of coconut oil fflo:targets coconut oil Food Safety wing seized 16,565 litres of coconut oil Seizure of suspect coconut oil fflo:foundAtStep Processing raids conducted at coconut oil manufacturing Operation Life fflo:targets coconut oil Operation Life, the Food Safety wing seized"},{"article_id":"oil-ff34df409a4806f1","slug":"oil-ff34df409a4806f1","title":"Coconut oil mills in Kangayam struggle to stem slide in production despite healthy market conditions","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2025-08-07","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Coimbatore/coconut-oil-mills-in-kangayam-struggle-to-stem-slide-in-production-despite-healthy-market-conditions/article69906326.ece","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.6941,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["coconut oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution","dilution"],"adulterants":["sunflower oil","palm oil"],"actions":[],"locations":["Kangayam, Tiruppur, Tamil Nadu, India"],"primary_state":"Tamil Nadu","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"On the face of it, the tidings seem favourable for the nearly 120 coconut mills in Kangayam town of Tiruppur district where oil production capacity ranges from 1,000 tonnes to 1,400 tonnes a day. Wholesale price of...","search_text":"$36"},{"article_id":"oil-fc714f38909e4348","slug":"oil-fc714f38909e4348","title":"Dry fruit oil traders under scanner ahead of Rakshabandhan","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-08-05","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/noida/dry-fruit-oil-traders-under-scanner-ahead-of-rakshabandhan/articleshow/123103360.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"$undefined","classifier_score":"$undefined","classifier_model":"$undefined","event_count":2,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["rice bran oil","soybean oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","mislabeling"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Greater Noida, Gautam Buddha Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, India","Noida, Gautam Buddha Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Noida: District food safety teams seized over 340 kg of food items suspected to be unsafe during inspections across Noida, Greater Noida, and Dadri, as part of a crackdown ahead of the Rakshabandhan festival on Aug 9....","search_text":"$37"},{"article_id":"oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","slug":"oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","title":"Court fines 2 for selling adulterated mustard oil in Ghaziabad | Noida News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-07-26","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/noida/court-fines-2-for-selling-adulterated-mustard-oil-in-ghaziabad/articleshow/122912688.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.7923283444275631,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["unclear"],"food_items":["mustard oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","unsafe_food"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["fine of Rs 20,000 each under Section 51 of the FSSA","fine of Rs 5,000 each under Section 59 (i) of the Act"],"locations":["Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Ghaziabad: The Court of Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate (ACJM) in Ghaziabad sentenced two individuals till the rise of the court and imposed a Rs 25,000 fine each for storing and selling substandard mustard oil....","search_text":"$38"},{"article_id":"oil-8e1ede70f7533502","slug":"oil-8e1ede70f7533502","title":"Coconut oil price skyrockets, crosses Rs 500 per litre","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2025-07-25","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/kerala/2025/Jul/25/coconut-oil-price-skyrockets-crosses-rs-500-per-litre","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.75,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.417,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["coconut oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["unknown"],"actions":[],"locations":["Kochi, Ernakulam, Kerala, India"],"primary_state":"Kerala","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":0,"excerpt":"KOCHI: As Keralites start preparations for Onam celebrations, the rising prices of essentials, especially coconut and coconut oil, are worrying families. The price of coconut oil which hovered around Rs 160 per litre a...","search_text":"$39"},{"article_id":"oil-70649ae86f99dffc","slug":"oil-70649ae86f99dffc","title":"Maharashtra News: Minister Narhari Zirwal Announces Suspension Of 2 FDA Officials, Closure Of Nandurbar Factory Over Oil Adulteration","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2025-07-07","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/mumbai/maharashtra-news-minister-narhari-zirwal-announces-suspension-of-2-fda-officials-closure-of-nandurbar-factory-over-oil-adulteration","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.6975422954563553,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["soybean oil","groundnut oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["suspension","closure"],"locations":["Akkalkuwa, Nandurbar, Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Mumbai, Jul 7: Maharashtra Food and Civil Supplies Minister Narhari Zirwal on Monday announced immediate suspension of two Food and Drug Administration (FDA) officials and closure of a factory in Nandurbar district...","search_text":"$3a"},{"article_id":"oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","slug":"oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","title":"Substandard edible oil found in Nandurbar: Minister warns of action","source":"indianexpress.com","date":"2025-07-07","url":"https://indianexpress.com/article/cities/mumbai/substandard-edible-oil-found-in-nandurbar-minister-warns-of-action-10112216/","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.9234249919399004,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil","refined soybean oil","groundnut oil"],"issue_types":["substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["Legal action under Food Safety and Standards Act"],"locations":["Nandurbar, Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Several edible oil samples collected in Nandurbar district have failed to meet food safety standards, and action will be taken against the guilty, Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Minister Narhari Zirwal informed the...","search_text":"$3b"},{"article_id":"oil-2027fa14e94958fd","slug":"oil-2027fa14e94958fd","title":"Maharashtra News: Rural Development Minister Jaikumar Gore Announces Suspension Of 2 Engineers Over Irregular Payments","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2025-07-07","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/mumbai/maharashtra-news-rural-development-minister-jaikumar-gore-announces-suspension-of-2-engineers-over-irregular-payments","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.4057576413847123,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["soybean oil","peanut oil"],"issue_types":["substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["suspension","closure"],"locations":["Nandurbar, Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Mumbai, July 7: Maharashtra Rural Development Minister Jaikumar Gore on Monday in the state council announced the suspension of two engineers from public work departments under the jurisdiction of Chhatrapati...","search_text":"$3c"},{"article_id":"oil-a882a3e8b7aeb487","slug":"oil-a882a3e8b7aeb487","title":"Coconut oil prices on the boil as retail price soars to ₹410/litre","source":"thehindubusinessline.com","date":"2025-06-17","url":"https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/economy/agri-business/coconut-oil-prices-on-the-boil-as-retail-price-soars-to-410litre/article69703785.ece","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.4134,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["coconut oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":["inferior and adulterated oils"],"actions":["banning of 42 brands of coconut oil"],"locations":["Kerala, India"],"primary_state":"Kerala","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":0,"excerpt":"Coconut oil prices continue to boil with its retail prices reaching ₹410 per litre, up ₹80 in the past week. Citing declining production of copra as a reason for prices to surge, Thalath Mahmood, president of Cochin Oil...","search_text":"$3d"},{"article_id":"oil-438415c185832786","slug":"oil-438415c185832786","title":"AMC seizes 105 tins of suspicious cooking oil from Behrampura - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-04-26","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/ahmedabad/amc-seizes-105-tins-of-suspicious-cooking-oil-from-behrampura/articleshow/120648762.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.6183954414544142,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["refined palm oil","refined soybean oil"],"issue_types":["substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India"],"primary_state":"Gujarat","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Ahmedabad: On Friday, the health department of the Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation (AMC) conducted a raid at the packaging unit of Milan Oils Pvt Ltd, located near Chandola Lake in the Behrampura area of the city. The...","search_text":"$3e"},{"article_id":"oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","slug":"oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","title":"Health dept seizes 352 boxes of refined oil after 6 hospitalised","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2025-04-22","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/cities/chandigarh-news/health-dept-seizes-352-boxes-of-refined-oil-after-6-hospitalised-101745259236048.html","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.3488802283324012,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["refined soyabean oil","Binni refined oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","contamination"],"adulterants":["Vitamin D"],"actions":["confiscation","public announcement"],"locations":["Rajpura, Patiala, Punjab, India"],"primary_state":"Punjab","accepted_triplet_count":6,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":16,"excerpt":"Health dept seizes 352 boxes of refined oil after 6 hospitalised Test results show Vitamin D toxicity in patients who hail from 2 Rajpura villages; according to the communication of the PGIMER, Chandigarh, with the...","search_text":"$3f"},{"article_id":"oil-05aa031a4b58524e","slug":"oil-05aa031a4b58524e","title":"Fake oil found in Bihar, here's how to spot it.","source":"indiatoday.in","date":"2025-03-25","url":"https://www.indiatoday.in/newsmo/video/fake-oil-found-in-bihar-heres-how-to-spot-it-2698982-2025-03-25?utm_source=rss","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.067321759216214,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["counterfeit","substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Rohtas district, Bihar, India"],"primary_state":"Bihar","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":0,"excerpt":"A cordial exchange between Russian President Vladimir Putin and American architect Rodney Cook Jr. at the St. Petersburg International Economic Forum highlighted cultural ties amid broader US-Russia tensions. Speaking...","search_text":"$40"},{"article_id":"oil-f9ab44d774810d93","slug":"oil-f9ab44d774810d93","title":"Crackdown on food adulteration: 112 kg rice bran oil destroyed, substandard sauces seized in Lucknow","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2025-03-12","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/cities/lucknow-news/crackdown-on-food-adulteration-112-kg-rice-bran-oil-destroyed-substandard-sauces-seized-in-lucknow-101741721802362.html","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8627560311883874,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["rice bran oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","unsafe_food"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","destruction"],"locations":["Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":15,"excerpt":"Crackdown on food adulteration: 112 kg rice bran oil destroyed, substandard sauces seized in Lucknow Upon examination, the FSDA team found that the vegetable and soy sauces were adulterated with potato pulp; samples...","search_text":"$41"},{"article_id":"oil-c84820229ce8af05","slug":"oil-c84820229ce8af05","title":"Shop owner held for selling expired edible oils with tampered labels","source":"siasat.com","date":"2025-03-12","url":"https://www.siasat.com/shop-owner-held-for-selling-expired-edible-oils-with-tampered-labels-3193611/","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.6596,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["edible oil","Fresh Heart brand oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","mislabeling","counterfeit"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["arrest","seizure","legal action"],"locations":["Hyderabad, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Hyderabad: A 51-year-old man was arrested by the Hyderabad police and the food safety officials for allegedly repacking and selling expired edible oils with altered labels. The accused has been identified as Ashok Kumar...","search_text":"$42"},{"article_id":"oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","slug":"oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","title":"Edible oil racket busted, 1 arrested in joint drive","source":"thehansindia.com","date":"2025-03-12","url":"https://www.thehansindia.com/telangana/edible-oil-racket-busted-1-arrested-in-joint-drive-953178","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.4952726051913269,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["mislabeling","substandard","unsafe_food"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["raid","arrest","seizure"],"locations":["Hyderabad, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"Hyderabad: The Hyderabad Commissioner’s Task Force, South-East Team, along with the Food Safety Officials, raided a shop in Mahaboob Mansion, Malakpet, and apprehended a person for repacking and selling edible oils with...","search_text":"$43"},{"article_id":"oil-156fd0980ec51fe6","slug":"oil-156fd0980ec51fe6","title":"Shop owner held for selling expired edible oils with tampered labels in Hyderabad","source":"etemaaddaily.com","date":"2025-03-12","url":"https://www.en.etemaaddaily.com/world/hyderabad/shop-owner-held-for-selling-expired-edible-oils-with-tampered-labels-in-hyderabad:171904","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.3034,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","mislabeling"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["arrest"],"locations":["Hyderabad, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Urdu Matrimonials Classifieds مزید دریافت کریں Geographic Reference City & Local Guides مزید دریافت کریں City & Local Guides Geographic Reference World Business Sports Entertainment Health Crime Edu and Jobs Politics...","search_text":"$44"},{"article_id":"oil-0536bbfbc5745875","slug":"oil-0536bbfbc5745875","title":"Shop owner arrested for selling expired edible oils","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2025-03-11","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/telangana/shop-owner-arrested-for-selling-expired-edible-oils/article69317546.ece","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.6027,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["edible oil","Fresh Heart brand oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","mislabeling"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["arrest","seizure"],"locations":["Hyderabad, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"A shop owner allegedly repacking and selling expired edible oils with tampered labels was arrested on Tuesday. During the raid, officials seized a total of 1,014 litres of edible oil valued at approximately ₹1.90 lakh....","search_text":"$45"},{"article_id":"oil-86a403aef71f924e","slug":"oil-86a403aef71f924e","title":"2,300kg of spurious paneer seized","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-03-06","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/ahmedabad/2300kg-of-spurious-paneer-seized/articleshow/118742649.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"$undefined","classifier_score":"$undefined","classifier_model":"$undefined","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["cottonseed oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","investigation"],"locations":["Kadi, Mehsana, Gujarat, India"],"primary_state":"Gujarat","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"Ahmedabad: More than 2,300kg of adulterated paneer was seized during a raid by a Food and Drug Control Administration (FDCA) team on Tuesday. The operation targeted Keshvi Food Products in Narsihpura in Kadi, Mehsana,...","search_text":"$46"},{"article_id":"oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","slug":"oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","title":"Fake oil, other items worth Rs8.5 lakh seized | Nagpur News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-02-16","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/nagpur/fake-oil-other-items-worth-rs8-5-lakh-seized/articleshow/118285152.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.6327850615796671,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["counterfeit","substitution"],"adulterants":["local oil"],"actions":["raid","seizure","booking"],"locations":["Nagpur, Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Nagpur: Following a complaint about fake oil with labels and packaging of branded companies being sold, crime branch sleuths conducted a raid on Friday at a godown on Outer Ring Road in Hudkeshwar. Cops found a factory...","search_text":"$47"},{"article_id":"oil-c3728ff063420cf8","slug":"oil-c3728ff063420cf8","title":"Major crackdown on adulterated ghee and oil in Pokaran over 14000kg seized","source":"timesofindia.indiatimes.com","date":"2025-01-01","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/jaipur/major-crackdown-on-adulterated-ghee-and-oil-in-pokaran-over-14000kg-seized/articleshow/131486941.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"$undefined","classifier_score":"$undefined","classifier_model":"$undefined","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["ghee","edible oil","palm oil","soybean oil","vanaspati"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["surprise raid","seizure","detention"],"locations":["Pokaran, Jaisalmer, Rajasthan, India"],"primary_state":"Rajasthan","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"JAISALMER: In a major action under the Rajasthan Government’s “Shuddh Aahar Milawat Par Vaar” campaign, authorities raided an illegal adulterated ghee and oil manufacturing unit in Pokaran late Sunday night and seized...","search_text":"$48"},{"article_id":"oil-d7ec006e22e070de","slug":"oil-d7ec006e22e070de","title":"Punjab &amp; Haryana high court asks Centre if they plan to open more labs to check cooking oil adulteration","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2024-12-15","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/cities/chandigarh-news/punjab-haryana-high-court-asks-centre-if-there-are-plans-to-open-more-labs-to-check-cooking-oil-adulteration-101734204296975.html","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.6877170300506283,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["cooking oil","miscible oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["miscible oil"],"actions":["Directive to Centre on lab expansion"],"locations":["Chandigarh, Punjab, India"],"primary_state":"Punjab","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":9,"excerpt":"Punjab & Haryana high court asks Centre if they plan to open more labs to check cooking oil adulteration The court was hearing a 2015 public interest litigation (PIL) by a Kapurthala resident Rajesh Gupta The Punjab and...","search_text":"$49"},{"article_id":"oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","slug":"oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","title":"Hc Questions Lack Of Local Testing Infra For Mustard Oil Adulteration | Chandigarh News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-12-15","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/chandigarh/hc-questions-lack-of-local-testing-infra-for-mustard-oil-adulteration/articleshow/116327780.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.7483593569424143,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["mustard oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["other oils"],"actions":["order to collect mustard oil samples for testing","directive to find central govt policy"],"locations":["Chandigarh, Punjab and Haryana, India"],"primary_state":"Punjab and Haryana","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"Chandigarh: As cases of food adulteration rise, especially in edible oils, it is surprising that the region, including Punjab, Haryana, and Chandigarh, has no facility to check different parameters of adulteration in...","search_text":"$4a"},{"article_id":"oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","slug":"oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","title":"Dahod Police Bust Major Spurious Cooking Oil Racket, Seize Goods Worth Over Rs 15 Lakhs | Vadodara News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-12-10","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/vadodara/dahod-police-bust-major-spurious-cooking-oil-racket-seize-goods-worth-over-rs-15-lakhs/articleshow/116183542.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8624483698868526,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["cooking oil","palm oil"],"issue_types":["substitution","mislabeling","adulteration"],"adulterants":["palm oil"],"actions":["seizure","detention"],"locations":["Dahod, Gujarat, India"],"primary_state":"Gujarat","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"Vadodara: After the discovery of a fake govt office and the forgery of non-agriculture land orders, a racket involving the sale of spurious cooking oil has emerged in Dahod. The special operations group (SOG) of Dahod...","search_text":"$4b"},{"article_id":"oil-2f0a177eecae442b","slug":"oil-2f0a177eecae442b","title":"Investigation into Dropsy Deaths in Nabha: New Committee Formed to Probe Tainted Edible Oil | Chandigarh News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-11-27","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/chandigarh/investigation-into-dropsy-deaths-in-nabha-new-committee-formed-to-probe-tainted-edible-oil/articleshow/115711329.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.5135767479948466,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["lab_confirmed"],"food_items":["edible oil","mustard oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":["unfit edible oil"],"actions":["advisory","committee formation"],"locations":["Nabha, Patiala, Punjab, India"],"primary_state":"Punjab","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"Patiala: The Patiala deputy commissioner has constituted a five-member committee under Nabha SDM officer to scrutinise and take forward an earlier investigation by health officials into three dropsy deaths which took...","search_text":"$4c"},{"article_id":"oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","slug":"oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","title":"Gautam Budh Nagar: 370 kg sweets, 750 ltr oil seized in food safety checks","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2024-10-29","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/cities/noida-news/gautam-budh-nagar-370-kg-sweets-750-ltr-oil-seized-in-food-safety-checks-101730140849789.html","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"$undefined","classifier_score":"$undefined","classifier_model":"$undefined","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","unsafe_food"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Noida, Gautam Budh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Gautam Budh Nagar: 370 kg sweets, 750 ltr oil seized in food safety checks Multiple teams of the Gautam Budh Nagar Food Safety and Drug Administration are conducting raids and collecting samples to ensure good quality...","search_text":"$4d"},{"article_id":"oil-a7080ed266c36f88","slug":"oil-a7080ed266c36f88","title":"Health Crisis in Nabha: Urgent Advisory After Fatal Dropsy Cases","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-10-15","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/chandigarh/health-crisis-in-nabha-urgent-advisory-after-fatal-dropsy-cases/articleshow/114230683.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8929,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["mustard oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["argemone"],"actions":["advisory"],"locations":["Nabha, Patiala, Punjab, India"],"primary_state":"Punjab","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"Patiala: After the death of three members of a family in Nabha from dropsy in Sept likely due to the consumption of adulterated edible oil, the health department has issued an advisory to officials, including senior...","search_text":"$4e"},{"article_id":"oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","slug":"oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","title":"Adulterated mustard oil behind 3 dropsy deaths in Nabha: report","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2024-10-14","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/cities/chandigarh-news/adulterated-mustard-oil-behind-3-dropsy-deaths-in-nabha-report-101728847891766.html","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.7115505895110944,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["lab_confirmed"],"food_items":["mustard oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","contamination"],"adulterants":["argemone mexicana seeds"],"actions":["survey"],"locations":["Nabha, Patiala, Punjab, India"],"primary_state":"Punjab","accepted_triplet_count":5,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"Adulterated mustard oil behind 3 dropsy deaths in Nabha: report Three members of the family died in September, with two women aged 26 and 32, succumbing at private hospitals, while a 72-year-old man died at his...","search_text":"$4f"},{"article_id":"oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77","slug":"oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77","title":"‘3 Dropsy deaths’: Patiala health officials launch probe","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2024-10-10","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/cities/chandigarh-news/3-dropsy-deaths-patiala-health-officials-launch-probe-101728500333054.html","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.92,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8445,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["mustard oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","contamination"],"adulterants":["Argemone mexicana seed oil"],"actions":["probe"],"locations":["Nabha, Patiala, Punjab, India"],"primary_state":"Punjab","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"‘3 Dropsy deaths’: Patiala health officials launch probe The probe was launched after a 52-year-old woman, a relative of the deceased, was admitted to PGIMER, Chandigarh. The medical history review of the patient...","search_text":"$50"},{"article_id":"oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","slug":"oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","title":"Inspection Conducted at Burger King Outlet in Malakpet,","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2024-10-01","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/telangana/hyderabad-food-safety-dept-seizes-unsafe-cooking-oil-from-burger-king-outlet-1827348","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.2743342020610271,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["unclear"],"food_items":["palm oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","contamination"],"adulterants":["Total Polar Compound"],"actions":["Seizure of 15 litres of cooking oil"],"locations":["Hyderabad, Malakpet, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Advertisement Hyderabad: The Commissioner of Food Safety conducted inspection at a Burger King outlet at Malakpet in Hyderabad and found issues related to cooking oil. The palm oil used for frying non-vegetarian items...","search_text":"$51"},{"article_id":"oil-76b9943656157edc","slug":"oil-76b9943656157edc","title":"Poor quality oil found in kits distributed among tribes, fine of ₹7 lakh imposed on company","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2024-09-05","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/kerala/poor-quality-oil-found-in-kits-distributed-among-tribes-fine-of-7-lakh-imposed-on-company/article68609646.ece","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"$undefined","classifier_score":"$undefined","classifier_model":"$undefined","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["coconut oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","mislabeling","unsafe_food"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["Fine of ₹7 lakh"],"locations":["Thodupuzha, Idukki, Kerala, India"],"primary_state":"Kerala","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"The Idukki Subcollector has imposed a fine of ₹7 lakh on Star Foods, a private coconut oil brand, for distributing substandard coconut oil to tribal families in Idukki. The fine has been imposed on the company’s owner...","search_text":"$52"},{"article_id":"oil-21d4880656b0c52f","slug":"oil-21d4880656b0c52f","title":"FSSAI seizes 14000 litres of oil Kanpur festive season","source":"healthandme.com","date":"2024-09-01","url":"https://www.healthandme.com/nutrition/kanpur-food-adulteration-fssai-seizes-14000l-of-oil-1320kg-rotten-dates-and-more-ahead-of-festive-season-article-153707864","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.899515577163256,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":9,"excerpt":"Credits: FSSAI and Canva After Indore's Bhagirathpura food contamination and Horlicks adulteration in Odisha, another news of food adulteration comes from the state of Uttar Pradesh where UP Food Safety and Drug...","search_text":"$53"},{"article_id":"oil-b434a85e1e9196d0","slug":"oil-b434a85e1e9196d0","title":"FDA Raid on 21 Food Establishments in Kanpur","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-08-18","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/kanpur/fda-raid-on-21-food-establishments-in-kanpur/articleshow/112599302.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.92,"classifier_label":"$undefined","classifier_score":"$undefined","classifier_model":"$undefined","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["mustard oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","sample_collection"],"locations":["Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Kanpur: A team from Food Security and Drug Administration (FDA) department conducted a raid on Friday at M/s MA Enterprises in Dada Nagar, resulting in the seizure of the establishment due to the absence of a food...","search_text":"$54"},{"article_id":"oil-fba2e5ff157abb74","slug":"oil-fba2e5ff157abb74","title":"AMC seizes 180kg of âedible oilâ, seals 5 units","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-07-28","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/ahmedabad/amc-seizes-180kg-of-edible-oil-seals-5-units/articleshow/112072084.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"$undefined","classifier_score":"$undefined","classifier_model":"$undefined","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","sealing"],"locations":["Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India"],"primary_state":"Gujarat","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Ahmedabad: A team of the civic body’s health department seized 180 kilograms of edible oil of various brands and sealed five establishments selling substandard food items between July 14 and Saturday. The health...","search_text":"$55"},{"article_id":"oil-06d5928124689ba0","slug":"oil-06d5928124689ba0","title":"Raid Conducted on Fast Food Centers and Hotels for Using Adulterated Oils","source":"thehansindia.com","date":"2024-07-11","url":"https://www.thehansindia.com/andhra-pradesh/raid-conducted-on-fast-food-centers-and-hotels-for-using-adulterated-oils-891217","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.3897,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["adulterated oils"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["warning"],"locations":["Badwel, India"],"primary_state":"$undefined","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"In a surprise inspection carried out by the Municipal Commissioner and Food Safety Officers, several fast food centers and hotels under Badwel Municipality were found to be using adulterated oils and tasting salt,...","search_text":"$56"},{"article_id":"oil-e1cd585e16b9635b","slug":"oil-e1cd585e16b9635b","title":"FSSAI issues notices to 55 edible oil manufacturers | Ahmedabad News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-07-09","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/ahmedabad/fssai-issues-notices-to-55-edible-oil-manufacturers/articleshow/111591411.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.1197170671829318,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["contamination","prohibited_additive"],"adulterants":["reused tin containers"],"actions":["Notice to 55 edible oil manufacturers"],"locations":["Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India"],"primary_state":"Gujarat","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Ahmedabad: FSSAI Gujarat issued notices to 55 edible oil manufacturers, restraining them from using old tins. These 55 include almost all refiners and re-packers. Sources said the Gujarat food and drug control...","search_text":"$57"},{"article_id":"oil-846611108e27fafb","slug":"oil-846611108e27fafb","title":"From the pages of The Hindu, July 4, 1974: Edible oil adulterated with used motor oil","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2024-07-04","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/archives/from-the-pages-of-the-hindu-july-4-1974-edible-oil-adulterated-with-used-motor-oil/article68364441.ece","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.7144802381536722,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["used motor oil"],"actions":["written to Ministry of Petroleum and Chemicals","referred to Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission"],"locations":["India"],"primary_state":"$undefined","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"New Delhi, July 3: An all-India sample survey conducted by Consumer Council of India has revealed that used motor oil is being utilised for adulteration with edible oils, hair oils etc, after being refined. On the basis...","search_text":"$58"},{"article_id":"oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","slug":"oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","title":"Fake Edible Oil Ingredients: 6 harmful ingredients found in fake edible oil | - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-06-05","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/life-style/food-news/harmful-ingredients-in-fake-edible-oil/articleshow/110737364.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.692216452573848,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit","mislabeling"],"adulterants":["Argemone oil"],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Ajmer, Rajasthan, India"],"primary_state":"Rajasthan","accepted_triplet_count":6,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":18,"excerpt":"The global food industry has seen a worrying rise in the prevalence of counterfeit products, and edible oil is no exception. The use of fake edible oils, which often contain harmful ingredients, poses significant health...","search_text":"$59"},{"article_id":"oil-0d7b13a282f9b466","slug":"oil-0d7b13a282f9b466","title":"Health News: Warning signs of diabetes seen in morning, how to identify fake cooking oil, laptop related health issues, common signs of vitamin A deficiency, and more | - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-06-05","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/life-style/health-fitness/health-news/toi-health-news-morning-briefing-warning-signs-of-diabetes-seen-in-morning-how-to-identify-fake-cooking-oil-laptop-related-health-issues-common-signs-of-vitamin-a-deficiency-and-more/articleshow/110702015.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.2901291950930987,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["cooking oil"],"issue_types":["counterfeit","adulteration"],"adulterants":["fake cooking oil"],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Ajmer, Rajasthan, India"],"primary_state":"Rajasthan","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":0,"excerpt":"Read today's health news briefing here. Your morning dose of health updates, news and latest guidelines are all here: News18,000 fake cooking oil seized, how to identify such oils: Nearly 18,000 litres of fake cooking...","search_text":"$5a"},{"article_id":"oil-63426d939d718e7f","slug":"oil-63426d939d718e7f","title":"How to identify fake cooking oil? (FSSAI recommended tips) - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-06-04","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/life-style/health-fitness/health-news/how-to-identify-fake-cooking-oil-fssai-recommended-tips/articleshow/110694766.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8945202964035499,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["cooking oil"],"issue_types":["mislabeling","adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Ajmer, Rajasthan, India"],"primary_state":"Rajasthan","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":17,"excerpt":"Nearly 18,000 litres of fake cooking oil was seized by the medical department in Ajmer, the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India ( FSSAI) has tweeted. \"About 18 thousand liters of misbranded edible oil was...","search_text":"$5b"},{"article_id":"oil-7b8839ea47991949","slug":"oil-7b8839ea47991949","title":"Over 12,000 litre of âspuriousâ oil seized | Jaipur News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-05-22","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/jaipur/over-12000-litre-of-spurious-oil-seized/articleshow/110316417.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8477581365529225,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["Ranthambore brand mustard oil"],"issue_types":["substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Jaipur, Rajasthan, India"],"primary_state":"Rajasthan","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"Jaipur: Food Safety and Drug Control Commissionerate teams on Tuesday seized 6,683 litre of edible oil in Muhana Mandi and 6,000 litre at a factory in Niwai on suspicion of substandard quality. Health department...","search_text":"$5c"},{"article_id":"oil-a0831d014f72baf3","slug":"oil-a0831d014f72baf3","title":"2 fall ill after consuming McDonald’s cheese and Theobroma cake","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-05-01","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/noida/2-fall-ill-after-consuming-mcdonalds-cheese-and-theobroma-cake/articleshow/109739869.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"$undefined","classifier_score":"$undefined","classifier_model":"$undefined","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["palm oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","contamination"],"adulterants":[],"actions":[],"locations":["Noida, Gautam Buddha Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"NOIDA: Teams of food safety and drug administration collected samples of palm oil, cheese and mayonnaise from a McDonald’s outlet in Sector 18 and pineapple cake from Theobroma in Sector 104 following complaints from...","search_text":"$5d"},{"article_id":"oil-5413f17944743156","slug":"oil-5413f17944743156","title":"DCA raids clinics, seizes fake organic oils with false claims","source":"thehansindia.com","date":"2024-03-04","url":"https://www.thehansindia.com/telangana/dca-raids-clinics-seizes-fake-organic-oils-with-false-claims-862432","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.678,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["almond oil","walnut oil","kalonji oil"],"issue_types":["mislabeling","counterfeit"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Hyderabad, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Hyderabad: Telangana State Drugs Control Administration (DCA) seized 'aio organic almond oil, walnut oil, and kalonji oil' from a clinic in Shalibanda for promoting misleading health benefits claims. The raid targeted...","search_text":"$5e"},{"article_id":"oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","slug":"oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","title":"MP: Spice Grinding Unit Sealed For Flouting Norms","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2024-02-25","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/indore/mp-spice-grinding-unit-sealed-for-flouting-norms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"$undefined","classifier_score":"$undefined","classifier_model":"$undefined","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["soybean oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","mislabeling"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["sealing","confiscation"],"locations":["Amjhera, Dhar, Madhya Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Madhya Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"Amjhera (Madhya Pradesh): In a recent crackdown against adulteration, the food safety team in Dhar district sealed a spice grinding factory operating without a licence in Amjhera. Following the directives of Collector...","search_text":"$5f"},{"article_id":"oil-6e721139517af252","slug":"oil-6e721139517af252","title":"MP: 200 Litres Adulterated Mustard Oil Found In Jabalpur Oil Factory During Surprise Inspection","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2024-02-19","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/bhopal/mp-200-litres-adulterated-mustard-oil-found-in-jabalpur-oil-factory-during-surprise-inspection","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8136805913011256,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["mustard oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","contamination","mislabeling"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["sealing"],"locations":["Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Madhya Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"Jabalpur (Madhya Pradesh): A team of food inspectors sealed a Jabalpur based oil factory on Monday after discovering significant contamination and unsanitary conditions within the premises. A barrel containing 200...","search_text":"$60"},{"article_id":"oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","slug":"oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","title":"Over 4 lakh litres seized in drive against substandard edible oil in UP","source":"theprint.in","date":"2024-01-01","url":"https://theprint.in/india/over-4-lakh-litres-seized-in-drive-against-substandard-edible-oil-in-up/2866887/","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.9047990471298696,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","inspection","correction notices"],"locations":["Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"Lucknow, Feb 28 (PTI) The Uttar Pradesh Food Safety and Drug Administration (FSDA) has seized 4,16,494 litres of edible oil of suspect or substandard quality, estimated to be worth approximately Rs 6.43 crore. FSDA has...","search_text":"$61"},{"article_id":"oil-9c21da748413e6f9","slug":"oil-9c21da748413e6f9","title":"‘Pressing’ issues: Coconut oil first in line for ‘Made in Kerala’ tag","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2023-12-22","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/kerala/2023/dec/22/pressing-issues-coconut-oil-first-in-line-for-made-in-kerala-tag-2643748.html","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.5198,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["coconut oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["adulterated oil"],"actions":[],"locations":["Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, India"],"primary_state":"Kerala","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: It’s all about setting standards and dealing with ‘pressing’ issues. Coconut oil will be the first product to get the ‘Made in Kerala’ tag, as part of the state government’s Kerala Brand initiative...","search_text":"$62"},{"article_id":"oil-077084a32a4e8faa","slug":"oil-077084a32a4e8faa","title":"Navi Mumbai: 7 booked for selling adulterated edible oil","source":"mid-day.com","date":"2023-12-07","url":"https://www.mid-day.com/mumbai/mumbai-crime-news/article/navi-mumbai-7-booked-for-selling-adulterated-edible-oil-23323774","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.7117216974740115,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["palm oil","groundnut oil","safflower oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["animal fats","harmful substances"],"actions":["First Information Report"],"locations":["Navi Mumbai, Thane, Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Navi Mumbai: 7 booked for selling adulterated edible oil Seven people linked to an agro firm have been accused of selling adulterated edible oil. Navi Mumbai Police has filed an FIR against them. Representative Image...","search_text":"$63"},{"article_id":"oil-028241dff8c29c89","slug":"oil-028241dff8c29c89","title":"'Spurious' food items seized at Ferozepur meritorious school","source":"tribuneindia.com","date":"2023-12-04","url":"https://www.tribuneindia.com/news/punjab/spurious-food-items-seized-at-ferozepur-meritorious-school-568467","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.2628,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["refined oil","flour"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["unknown adulterant"],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Hakumatwala, Ferozepur, Punjab, India"],"primary_state":"Punjab","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Anirudh Gupta Ferozepur, December 3 A day after 74 students of a meritorious school in Sangrur had to be hospitalised after consuming ‘substandard’ food, a team from the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India...","search_text":"$64"},{"article_id":"oil-829d382c68663635","slug":"oil-829d382c68663635","title":"Nashik Fda Cracks Down On Adulterated Food Items, Oil | Nashik News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2023-11-09","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/nashik/nashik-fda-cracks-down-on-adulterated-food-items-oil/articleshow/105082876.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.9009942870544224,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["loose oil","shrikhand"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Nashik, Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"Nashik: The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) of the Nashik division has seized adulterated food items and spurious cooking oil from different parts of the district over the last 15-20 days. The total amount of seized...","search_text":"$65"},{"article_id":"oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","slug":"oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","title":"Mumbai News: Adulterated Sweets, Edible Oil Worth ₹1.64 Lakh Seized By FDA","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2023-11-06","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/mumbai/mumbai-news-adulterated-sweets-edible-oil-worth-164-lakh-seized-by-fda","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8980067916239759,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":2,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["sunflower oil","palmolein oil","used cooking oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","mislabeling"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["raid","seizure"],"locations":["Mumbai, Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Mumbai: Ahead of Diwali, the Food And Drug Administration (FDA) has raided three establishments in the western suburbs and seized adulterated sweets and edible oil worth ₹1,64,655. A senior official, who was part of the...","search_text":"$66"},{"article_id":"oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","slug":"oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","title":"Adani Wilmar files FIR against sale of counterfeit ‘Fortune’ products by Jumbotail","source":"financialexpress.com","date":"2023-07-23","url":"https://www.financialexpress.com/industry/adani-wilmar-files-fir-against-sale-of-counterfeit-fortune-products-by-jumbotail/3183110/","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.4479,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["mustard oil","soybean oil"],"issue_types":["counterfeit"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["raid","FIR filed"],"locations":["Gautam Budhnagar, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"FMCG major Adani Wilmar has filed a police complaint against B2B platform Jumbotail Pvt. Ltd for allegedly distributing counterfeit ‘Fortune’ products. Acting upon this complaint, the law enforcement authorities...","search_text":"$67"},{"article_id":"oil-30270b1b4280233d","slug":"oil-30270b1b4280233d","title":"Adani Wilmar Files Police Complaint Against Sale Of Counterfeit Fortune Brand Products","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2023-07-23","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/business/adani-wilmar-files-police-complaint-against-sale-of-counterfeit-fortune-brand-products","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.587,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["Fortune Kacchi Ghani Mustard Oil","Fortune Refined Soybean Oil","Fortune Sarso Oil"],"issue_types":["counterfeit"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["FIR lodged","raid"],"locations":["Badalpur, Gautam Budhnagar District, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Edible oil major Adani Wilmar Ltd on Saturday said it has lodged a police complaint against a B2B platform for allegedly distributing counterfeit products in the name of its 'Fortune' brand. As part of a routine market...","search_text":"$68"},{"article_id":"oil-7269f661e72c703f","slug":"oil-7269f661e72c703f","title":"Adani Wilmar files police complaint against sale of counterfeit Fortune brand products","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2023-07-22","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/business/india-business/adani-wilmar-files-police-complaint-against-sale-of-counterfeit-fortune-brand-products/articleshow/102043619.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.575,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["Fortune Kacchi Ghani Mustard Oil","Fortune Refined Soybean Oil","Fortune Sarso Oil"],"issue_types":["counterfeit"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["FIR lodged","raid"],"locations":["Gautam Budhnagar, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"NEW DELHI: Edible oil major Adani Wilmar Ltd on Saturday said it has lodged a police complaint against a B2B platform for allegedly distributing counterfeit products in the name of its ' Fortune' brand. As part of a...","search_text":"$69"},{"article_id":"oil-c1a2f95596a3b00d","slug":"oil-c1a2f95596a3b00d","title":"Food Dept Seizes 831l Mustard Oil | Kanpur News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2023-03-06","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/kanpur/food-dept-seizes-831l-mustard-oil/articleshow/98439612.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8041298144466288,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["mustard oil","soyabean oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["Seizure of 799 litre mustard oil","Seizure of 34 litre refined soyabean oil"],"locations":["Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Kanpur: Food security and drug administration department on Sunday seized around 831 litre of mustard oil worth Rs 1,14,764 and collected 19 samples of food items and sent them to lab for testing. The mustard oil was...","search_text":"$6a"},{"article_id":"oil-4b88eb2520f8cc22","slug":"oil-4b88eb2520f8cc22","title":"Bhopal: Lose oil sale; FDA suspends mills’ licence","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2022-12-17","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/bhopal/bhopal-lose-oil-sale-fda-suspends-mills-licence","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.6509,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["soybean oil","palmolein oil"],"issue_types":["mislabeling","substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["suspension of licence"],"locations":["Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Madhya Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Bhopal (Madhya Pradesh): Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) Department, which had conducted a raid at Shankar Oil Mills located in Azad Market on Friday, has suspended the latter’s licence. The order to suspend licence...","search_text":"$6b"},{"article_id":"oil-e1aa62675070cacd","slug":"oil-e1aa62675070cacd","title":"Argemone poisoning claims life in Jawalamukhi, alert sounded in HP’s Kangra","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2022-11-19","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/cities/chandigarh-news/argemone-poisoning-claims-life-in-jawalamukhi-alert-sounded-in-hp-s-kangra-101668798072979.html","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.4488,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["mustard oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","contamination"],"adulterants":["Argemone mexicana"],"actions":["public alert"],"locations":["Jawalamukhi, Kangra, Himachal Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Himachal Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":13,"excerpt":"Argemone poisoning claims life in Jawalamukhi, alert sounded in HP’s Kangra The victims had bought the mustard from a local market in Khudian. It is learnt that the wholesaler is based at Paragpur area and it is...","search_text":"$6c"},{"article_id":"oil-b96369f55af40397","slug":"oil-b96369f55af40397","title":"Govt Cracks Down On Sale Of Adulterated Coconut Oil | Thiruvananthapuram News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2022-11-17","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/thiruvananthapuram/govt-cracks-down-on-sale-of-adulterated-coconut-oil/articleshow/95568940.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.9165677579315566,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["coconut oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":["sulphur"],"actions":["Operation Oil","notices","fines"],"locations":["Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, India"],"primary_state":"Kerala","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":1,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Thiruvananthapuram: The food safety department has launched a special drive across the state as part of its crackdown on adulterated coconut oil. Named Operation Oil, searches have been conducted in as many as 100...","search_text":"$6d"},{"article_id":"oil-3be954e8def80c8d","slug":"oil-3be954e8def80c8d","title":"Operation Oil: manufacturer to be allowed to launch only one brand of oil ","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2022-11-16","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/kerala/operation-oil-manufacturer-to-be-allowed-to-launch-only-one-brand-of-oil/article66144992.ece","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.9416271420983549,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["coconut oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["Operation Oil"],"locations":["Kerala, India"],"primary_state":"Kerala","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Tightening the noose around the adulterated coconut oil manufacturers, the State government has decided to allow a manufacturer to launch only one brand of coconut oil. The norm would be strictly enforced in the State...","search_text":"$6e"},{"article_id":"oil-7ced813eb9eb1314","slug":"oil-7ced813eb9eb1314","title":"Hyderabad: 7 LPG cylinders seized in cordon and search; 10 held","source":"siasat.com","date":"2022-11-06","url":"https://www.siasat.com/hyderabad-7-lpg-cylinders-seized-in-cordon-and-search-10-held-2450708/","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.2688,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal carcasses"],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Hyderabad, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Hyderabad: The Chaderghat police on Sunday detained 10 persons and 1 history-sheeter, for the illegal sale of gas cylinders, and seized 45 bikes as owners failed to produce supporting documents. The police searched...","search_text":"$6f"},{"article_id":"oil-7ed3f9582cae741d","slug":"oil-7ed3f9582cae741d","title":"Mustard, Palm Olein Oil Worth â¹7.7l Seized | Kanpur News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2022-10-21","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/kanpur/mustard-palm-olein-oil-worth-7-7l-seized/articleshow/95000423.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8433136916258085,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["mustard oil","palm olein oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Kanpur: Teams of FSA on Thursday seized over 604 liters of mustard and palm olein oil worth Rs 7,67,800 from various vendors in city. Besides, the department also collected as many as 23 samples for lab testing....","search_text":"$70"},{"article_id":"oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","slug":"oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","title":"Uttarakhand: A year on, mustard oil manufacturer, supplier penalised for adulteration | Dehradun News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2022-10-17","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/dehradun/uttarakhand-a-year-on-mustard-oil-manufacturer-supplier-penalised-for-adulteration/articleshow/94903787.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.6180697772580839,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["lab_confirmed"],"food_items":["mustard oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["unspecified"],"actions":["penalty"],"locations":["Pauri, Uttarakhand, India"],"primary_state":"Uttarakhand","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"In a matter of violation of food safety standards, a local court in Pauri penalised a supplier and a manufacturer of mustard oil with Rs 3 lakh, holding them guilty of adulteration. The sample was collected a few days...","search_text":"$71"},{"article_id":"oil-94951aba738c80b3","slug":"oil-94951aba738c80b3","title":"16,600 Kg Mustard Oil Seized In Vki | Jaipur News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2022-10-14","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/jaipur/16600-kg-mustard-oil-seized-in-vki/articleshow/94848908.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8785975550730426,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["mustard oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Jaipur, Rajasthan, India"],"primary_state":"Rajasthan","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":0,"excerpt":"Jaipur: Intensifying measures to prevent the sale of adulterated food products ahead of Diwali, health department teams on Thursday seized 166 quintals of mustard oil in Vishwakarma Industrial (VKI) area on suspicion...","search_text":"16,600 Kg Mustard Oil Seized In Vki | Jaipur News - Times of India indiatimes.com Jaipur: Intensifying measures to prevent the sale of adulterated food products ahead of Diwali, health department teams on Thursday seized 166 quintals of mustard oil in Vishwakarma Industrial (VKI) area on suspicion that they were adulterated.\nThe action was taken under the âShudh Ke Liye Yudhâ campaign with the help of the health department, district administration and crime branch.\nMstard oil samples were taken and around 3,600 kg of mustard oil was seized from Goyal Edible on Road Number 14 in VKI area. Samples were collected and 13,000 kgs of mustard oil was also seized from Goyal Oil and Dal Mill. Coriander powder was also seized from Surya Enterprises in VKI area, said officials. TNN mustard oil adulteration seizure suspected Jaipur, Rajasthan, India"},{"article_id":"oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","slug":"oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","title":"2500 litres of suspected adulterated cooking oil seized","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2022-10-12","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Hyderabad/2500-litres-of-suspected-adulterated-cooking-oil-seized/article66001879.ece","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8455905632918441,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["cooking oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","mislabeling"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","raid"],"locations":["Vennampalli, Karimnagar, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"A joint team of the Special Branch police and the Food Safety Department personnel on Wednesday seized 2,500 litres of suspected adulterated cooking oil during a raid on an oil mill at Vennampalli village in Saidapur...","search_text":"$72"},{"article_id":"oil-63f43befc46e25fa","slug":"oil-63f43befc46e25fa","title":"FDA adopts zero-tolerance policy for edible oil sold loose and in reused tins | Nagpur News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2022-10-04","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/nagpur/fda-adopts-zero-tolerance-policy-for-edible-oil-sold-loose-and-in-reused-tins/articleshow/94628169.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8549294380140151,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Nagpur, Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"Nagpur: The Food and drugs administration (FDA) has stepped up its crackdown on edible oils sold loose and also in reused tins. In 2022 till date, FDA has seized 2,075 kgs of edible oils worth more than Rs 2.99 lakhs....","search_text":"$73"},{"article_id":"oil-aa814b41a4920904","slug":"oil-aa814b41a4920904","title":"Using counterfeit packaging lands Ropar trader in police net","source":"tribuneindia.com","date":"2022-09-16","url":"https://www.tribuneindia.com/news/punjab/using-counterfeit-packaging-lands-trader-in-police-net-432143","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.3157,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["mustard oil"],"issue_types":["substitution","mislabeling","counterfeit"],"adulterants":["cheaper brands"],"actions":["arrest","seizure"],"locations":["Ropar, Punjab, India"],"primary_state":"Punjab","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Ropar, September 15 The police have arrested a person and seized counterfeit packaging of Tata salt, Patanjali mustard oil and Harpic toilet cleaner from his possession. The accused has been identified as Gian Singh, a...","search_text":"$74"},{"article_id":"oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","slug":"oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","title":"Chennai: Shop with 4.3 tonnes of blended cooking oil in sump sealed","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2022-08-24","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/chennai/chennai-shop-with-4-3-tonnes-of-blended-cooking-oil-in-sump-sealed/articleshow/93741067.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.7123,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["blended cooking oil"],"issue_types":["contamination","substandard","unsafe_food"],"adulterants":["dust","sand"],"actions":["sealed","show-cause notice"],"locations":["Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India"],"primary_state":"Tamil Nadu","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"CHENNAI: Food safety officials in Chennai on Tuesday sealed a small oil shop in Pillayar Koil Street in West Mambalam for illegally stocking more than 4300 kg of blended cooking oil - palm oil and sunflower - and...","search_text":"$75"},{"article_id":"oil-fc5474312cf8529f","slug":"oil-fc5474312cf8529f","title":"With Onam around, adulterated coconut oil floods Kerala market","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2022-08-23","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/cities/thiruvananthapuram/2022/aug/23/with-onam-around-adulterated-coconut-oil-floods-kerala-market-2490320.html","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8246640477375261,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["coconut oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":["unknown"],"actions":["ban on 166 coconut oil brands","special drives"],"locations":["Kerala, India"],"primary_state":"Kerala","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: With Onam around the corner, the flow of adulterated milk and coconut oil to Kerala has increased raising serious concern about the quality of the products sold in the market. Recently, Kerafed has...","search_text":"$76"},{"article_id":"oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","slug":"oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","title":"Over 4,000 litre of adulterated oil seized from Chennai store","source":"indianexpress.com","date":"2022-08-23","url":"https://indianexpress.com/article/cities/chennai/over-4-litre-of-adulterated-oil-seized-from-chennai-store-8107733/","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8571322894083552,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","contamination"],"adulterants":["mud","dust"],"actions":["seizure","sealing","notice issued"],"locations":["Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India"],"primary_state":"Tamil Nadu","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Over 4,000 litre of adulterated oil seized from Chennai store The officials noted that they have sent the samples of the oil to the laboratory. Further action will be taken depending on the result, the officials said....","search_text":"$77"},{"article_id":"oil-f1693a0670f7b784","slug":"oil-f1693a0670f7b784","title":"Loose Cooking Oil Seized, Fir Lodged Against Proprietor | Indore News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2022-08-18","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/indore/loose-cooking-oil-seized-fir-lodged-against-proprietor/articleshow/93627772.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.7814203420613127,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["soyabean oil","cooking oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","FIR lodged"],"locations":["Indore, Madhya Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Madhya Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"INDORE: Indore district administration on Wednesday collected samples of cooking oil from a wholesale shop and seized soyabean oil worth Rs 34,500 on suspicion adulteration. Acting on a complaint, collector Manish Singh...","search_text":"$78"},{"article_id":"oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","slug":"oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","title":"Alcohol poisoning and edible oil fraud cases soar in India","source":"foodnavigator-asia.com","date":"2022-08-15","url":"https://www.foodnavigator-asia.com/Article/2022/08/15/alcohol-poisoning-and-edible-oil-fraud-cases-soar-in-india/","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.3646053693868905,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit"],"adulterants":["adulterated oil"],"actions":["confiscation"],"locations":["Rajasthan, India"],"primary_state":"Rajasthan","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":8,"excerpt":"India has been a hotspot for food and beverage adulteration cases over the past several years, covering a wide range of products from dairy to honey and more – and after the COVID-19 pandemic hit the region, alcohol...","search_text":"$79"},{"article_id":"oil-722884cee1da5016","slug":"oil-722884cee1da5016","title":"Ganj Basoda: Adulterated Oil surfaces in markets ahead of the festival season","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2022-07-29","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/bhopal/ganj-basoda-adulterated-oil-surfaces-in-markets-ahead-of-the-festival-season","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.7888174889564717,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution","mislabeling"],"adulterants":["adulterated oil"],"actions":[],"locations":["Ganj Basoda, Madhya Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Madhya Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":6,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Ganj Basoda (Madhya Pradesh): As the festival season is round the corner, the use of low quality and adulterated edible oils has again taken over in the eateries situated in several rural areas of the Ganjbasoda...","search_text":"$7a"},{"article_id":"oil-4bd4c6831e9c7077","slug":"oil-4bd4c6831e9c7077","title":"Khargone: Edible oil worth Rs 50 lakh seized","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2022-06-22","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/indore/khargone-edible-oil-worth-rs-50-lakh-seized","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.4964872490839554,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["mislabeling","unsafe_food"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","raid"],"locations":["Khargone, Madhya Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Madhya Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Khargone (Madhya Pradesh): In a major crackdown on those involved in hoarding, a joint team of five departments led by deputy collector Omnarayan Singh conducted raids at shops and godowns of Gurukrupa Traders Bistan...","search_text":"$7b"},{"article_id":"oil-9790eee6e00c0018","slug":"oil-9790eee6e00c0018","title":"tinsukia police: Tinsukia Police Bust Oil Adulteration Racket Arrest 4, One On The Run","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2022-06-05","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/guwahati/tinsukia-police-bust-oil-adulteration-racket-arrest-4-one-on-the-run/articleshow/92013793.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.355,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["condensate oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["condensate oil"],"actions":["arrest","seizure"],"locations":["Tinsukia, Assam, India"],"primary_state":"Assam","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"DIBRUGARH: Blowing the lid off a thriving adulterated oil racket in upper Assam, Tinsukia Police on Saturday arrested four persons and seized 14,000 litres of stolen condensate oil from Tinsukia and Dibrugarh districts....","search_text":"$7c"},{"article_id":"oil-85127f0bde3109d3","slug":"oil-85127f0bde3109d3","title":"Oil’s not well? Food safety teams smell fraud","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2022-04-04","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Hyderabad/oils-not-well-food-safety-teams-smell-fraud/article65290089.ece","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8715256357618476,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["old oil"],"actions":["sampling"],"locations":["Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":8,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"The Russia-Ukraine war has driven up the price of edible oil in India. Suspecting that the price rise may lead to sale of adulterated or substandard edible oil, Telangana Food Safety Authority teams conducted checks at...","search_text":"$7d"},{"article_id":"oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0","slug":"oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0","title":"Vigilance Continues Raids, Monitors Edible Oil Trade | Vijayawada News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2022-03-21","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/vijayawada/vigilance-continues-raids-monitors-edible-oil-trade/articleshow/90341966.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.4831315027247889,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":["spurious oil"],"actions":["registration of criminal cases"],"locations":["Vijayawada, Krishna, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Vijayawada: Vigilance and enforcement department additional director general Dr. S Bagchi said they are continuously monitoring the sale of edible oil considering the shortage due to the war in Ukraine. He said strict...","search_text":"$7e"},{"article_id":"oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","slug":"oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","title":"Visakhapatnam: Traders find new ways to strike a deal","source":"thehansindia.com","date":"2022-03-12","url":"https://www.thehansindia.com/news/cities/visakhapatnam/visakhapatnam-traders-find-new-ways-to-strike-a-deal-733011","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.2845,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["mislabeling"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["raid","seizure","case_filed"],"locations":["Visakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"Visakhapatnam: With officials giving clear instructions not to sell edible oils above than the MRP (maximum retail price), wholesale dealers are looking for newer ways to hoodwink the officials and strike a deal. To...","search_text":"$7f"},{"article_id":"oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","slug":"oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","title":"Suspected adulterated oil","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2022-03-02","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Tiruchirapalli/food-safety-officials-crack-the-whip-on-adulteration-of-edible-oil-in-tiruchi/article65183634.ece","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.9306742881971514,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["groundnut oil","gingelly oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution","dilution"],"adulterants":["palm oil","rice bran oil"],"actions":["stop sale order"],"locations":["Woraiyur, India"],"primary_state":"$undefined","accepted_triplet_count":5,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Officials of the Food Safety Department have lifted samples of suspected adulterated groundnut and gingelly oil from a manufacturing-cum-packaging unit at Woraiyur in the city. Following inspection carried out by a team...","search_text":"$80"},{"article_id":"oil-08837290b8f04c6c","slug":"oil-08837290b8f04c6c","title":"Maha govt, FDA crack down on oil manufacturers to check on adulteration","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2022-01-28","url":"https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/industry/cons-products/food/maha-govt-fda-crack-down-on-oil-manufacturers-to-check-on-adulteration/articleshow/89178574.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.680249171962088,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["sunflower oil","palm oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["palm oil"],"actions":["raid"],"locations":["Mumbai, Navi Mumbai, Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":0,"excerpt":"The state department had raided a factory in Vashi area of Navi Mumbai on Tuesday, while the FDA conducted operations at units in Bhiwandi and Mira Road, the official said. The raids were conducted based on information...","search_text":"$81"},{"article_id":"oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","slug":"oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","title":"185 spurious mustard oil cans seized in Burrabazar | Kolkata News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2021-11-27","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/kolkata/185-spurious-mustard-oil-cans-seized-in-burrabazar/articleshow/87938067.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8510212505655528,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["mustard oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["rice bran oil"],"actions":["raid","seizure","detention"],"locations":["Kolkata, West Bengal, India"],"primary_state":"West Bengal","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":18,"excerpt":"KOLKATA: The enforcement branch has raided the premises of three edible oil traders in the Posta region after receiving complaints that they were blending rice bran oil with deadly dyes and chemicals and repacking them...","search_text":"$82"},{"article_id":"oil-bd1df718191f8f6e","slug":"oil-bd1df718191f8f6e","title":"Tribunal slaps Rs 2 lakh fine on oil producer","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2021-11-06","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/cities/thiruvananthapuram/2021/nov/06/tribunal-slaps-rs-2-lakh-fine-on-oil-producer-2380042.html","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"$undefined","classifier_score":"$undefined","classifier_model":"$undefined","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["unclear"],"food_items":["coconut oil"],"issue_types":["substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["Rs 2 lakh fine"],"locations":["Kunnathunadu panchayat, Ernakulam, Kerala, India"],"primary_state":"Kerala","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: The Food Safety Appellate Tribunal here has upheld the Rs 2-lakh fine that was imposed on a coconut oil manufacturer for selling substandard oil. The order was issued by judge S Sajikumar. The case...","search_text":"$83"},{"article_id":"oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","slug":"oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","title":"FDA urges caution while buying Diwali sweets","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2021-10-27","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/kolhapur/fda-urges-caution-while-buying-diwali-sweets/articleshow/87286991.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"$undefined","classifier_score":"$undefined","classifier_model":"$undefined","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["cooking oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["raid","seizure"],"locations":["Sangli, Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"Kolhapur: The Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) has urged citizens to be on the alert while purchasing and consuming snacks and sweets during Diwali.The FDA said it would conduct a campaign against those found making...","search_text":"$84"},{"article_id":"oil-66b89ef48f4536a9","slug":"oil-66b89ef48f4536a9","title":"Indore: In ongoing war against adulteration, 3K lt edible oil seized from two units","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2021-09-26","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/indore/indore-in-ongoing-war-against-adulteration-3k-lt-edible-oil-seizedfrom-two-units","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.752403651074907,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["raid","seizure"],"locations":["Indore, Madhya Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Madhya Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Indore A joint team of Crime Branch and Food and Civil Supply department raided two oil packaging units in Palda area on suspicion that they were adulterating edibile oil. In all 3,000 litres of oil was seized from the...","search_text":"$85"},{"article_id":"oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","slug":"oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","title":"With pics - Arsh – FCS + FCS2 STRAP: Drive against ‘adulteration mafia’ in Indore: District FCS raids edible oil factory, petrol pump","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2021-09-25","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/indore/with-pics-arsh-fcs-fcs2strapdrive-against-adulteration-mafia-in-indore-district-fcs-raids-edible-oil-factory-petrol-pump","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.7114987760993686,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil","mustard oil","groundnut oil","soybean oil","sunflower oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard","mislabeling"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","raid"],"locations":["Indore, Madhya Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Madhya Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"Indore: A team of the District Food and Civil Supply led by additional collector Abhay Bedekar, in a drive against ‘adulteration mafia’, conducted two drives in two areas under the Indore department jurisdiction on...","search_text":"$86"},{"article_id":"oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","slug":"oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","title":"Kurnool police arrest five member gang involved in selling fake oils and tea powders using fake labels of top FMCGs","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2021-09-06","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/amaravati/kurnool-police-arrest-five-member-gang-involved-in-selling-fake-oils-and-tea-powders-using-fake-labels-of-top-fmcgs/articleshow/85978555.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.5533,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["coconut oil"],"issue_types":["counterfeit","mislabeling"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["arrest","seizure","case registration"],"locations":["Kurnool, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"TIRUPATI: Kurnool district police wing busted a five member gang involved in selling spurious products in large quantities using fake labels on Monday. The gang was involved in selling away fake coconut oils and tea...","search_text":"$87"},{"article_id":"oil-f96a10806285c261","slug":"oil-f96a10806285c261","title":"Three of family die of dropsy over 10 days","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2021-08-06","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/rajkot/three-of-family-die-of-dropsy-over-10-days/articleshow/85079434.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.92,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.3388,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["mustard oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","unsafe_food"],"adulterants":["adulterated mustard oil"],"actions":[],"locations":["Palanpur, Banaskantha, Gujarat, India"],"primary_state":"Gujarat","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Palanpur: Three out of seven members of a family who had suffered from food poisoning last month in Kundi village of Dhanera have died over the last 10 days, said medical officer of Banaskantha on Thursday. Epidemic...","search_text":"$88"},{"article_id":"oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","slug":"oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","title":"Indore: Edible oil worth Rs 9.90L seized from Palda area, 11 samples taken from factory","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2021-07-23","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/indore/indore-edible-oil-worth-rs-990l-seized-from-palda-area-11-samples-taken-from-factory","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.6592694272791453,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil","surya coconut oil","halo refined sunflower oil","halo refined soyabean oil","siddha baba refined soyabean oil"],"issue_types":["mislabeling","substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","inspection"],"locations":["Indore, Madhya Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Madhya Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":9,"excerpt":"Indore: A team of food and drug administration department conducted a surprise inspection of an edible oil repacking factory in the Palda area on Friday and found that the FSSAI number of the oil, imported from Nepal,...","search_text":"$89"},{"article_id":"oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba","slug":"oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba","title":"Madhya Pradesh: Pulse mills, hotels and grocery shops inspected; samples collected for testing","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2021-07-17","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/indore/madhya-pradesh-pulse-mills-hotels-and-grocery-shops-inspected-samples-collected-for-testing","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"$undefined","classifier_score":"$undefined","classifier_model":"$undefined","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["cooking oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","contamination"],"adulterants":["total polar materials"],"actions":["destroyed"],"locations":["Barwani, Madhya Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Madhya Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Guna: District administration Guna, a joint team of food and revenue department conducted raids on big hotels and factories of Guna city on Friday. The team inspected Sanjay Dal Mill, Ved Dal Mill and Deepak Dal Mill in...","search_text":"$8a"},{"article_id":"oil-f5b6386895404f0b","slug":"oil-f5b6386895404f0b","title":"Epidemic dropsy claims two lives in Gujarat's Banaskantha","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2021-06-19","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/rajkot/dropsy-claims-two-lives-in-banaskantha/articleshow/83648909.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.7722,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["mustard oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","contamination"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["medical observation"],"locations":["Gundri, Banaskantha, Gujarat, India"],"primary_state":"Gujarat","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"PALANPUR: Two women died and six others of their family fell ill reportedly after consuming adulterated mustard oil in Gundri village of Banaskantha’s Dantiwada taluka. All of them are suspected to have suffered from...","search_text":"$8b"},{"article_id":"oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","slug":"oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","title":"Nagpur: Adulterated edible oil racket busted, 3 booked | Nagpur News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2021-06-17","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/nagpur/adulterated-edible-oil-racket-busted-3-booked/articleshow/83588940.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8942772848383711,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit","mislabeling"],"adulterants":["impure edible oil"],"actions":["booking of three persons","seizure of adulterated oil"],"locations":["Nagpur, Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"NAGPUR: Tehsil police on Tuesday busted an adulterated edible oil manufacturing unit and booked three persons in this connection. The cops led by senior PI Jayesh Bhandarkar also seized a huge quantity of adulterated...","search_text":"$8c"},{"article_id":"oil-4877f76e174824e5","slug":"oil-4877f76e174824e5","title":"Patanjali mustard oil found to be of substandard food quality: Rajasthan govt","source":"indiatoday.in","date":"2021-06-10","url":"https://www.indiatoday.in/india/rajasthan/story/patanjali-mustard-oil-substandard-quality-rajasthan-govt-1812995-2021-06-10?utm_source=rss","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.7685099387027947,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["mustard oil"],"issue_types":["substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["raid on Singhania oil mill"],"locations":["Alwar, Rajasthan, India"],"primary_state":"Rajasthan","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"Patanjali mustard oil found to be of substandard food quality: Rajasthan govt According to the Rajasthan government, mustard oil sold by Baba Ramdev's company Patanjali has been found to be substandard by the Food...","search_text":"$8d"},{"article_id":"oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","slug":"oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","title":"Adulteration in edible oil detected ","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2021-04-22","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Tiruchirapalli/adulteration-in-edible-oil-detected/article34386473.ece","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.942019995967352,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["refined sunflower oil","palm oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution","mislabeling"],"adulterants":["palm oil"],"actions":["suspend operations","seizure"],"locations":["Tiruchi, Tamil Nadu, India"],"primary_state":"Tamil Nadu","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"Food Safety officials on Thursday ordered a edible oil packaging unit at Sangilandapuram in the city to suspend operations after they detected a case of suspected adulteration. The officials led by R. Ramesh Babu,...","search_text":"$8e"},{"article_id":"oil-13fd5c31e278a577","slug":"oil-13fd5c31e278a577","title":"Adulteration found in paneer, mustard oil & honey in Doon | Dehradun News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2021-03-23","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/dehradun/adulteration-found-in-paneer-mustard-oil-honey-in-doon/articleshow/81638388.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.4492838459400656,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["unclear"],"food_items":["mustard oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":[],"locations":["Dehradun, Uttarakhand, India"],"primary_state":"Uttarakhand","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"DEHRADUN: The district food and drug department on Monday received quality test reports of 19 food items, the samples of which were collected from the state capital in the last two months. According to the reports,...","search_text":"$8f"},{"article_id":"oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","slug":"oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","title":"Mumbai: Over 50% edible oils seized in raids found non-certified","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2021-02-02","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/mumbai/mumbai-over-50-edible-oils-seized-in-raids-found-non-certified","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.7366998079318416,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["mustard oil","peanut oil","sunflower oil","palm oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","mislabeling"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","inspection"],"locations":["Mumbai, Thane, Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"More than 50 per cent of edible oils seized by the Food and Drug Administration in Thane and Mumbai during raids last month have been found to be non-certified, the FDA has said. Raids were conducted on eight...","search_text":"$90"},{"article_id":"oil-f138f57de764f810","slug":"oil-f138f57de764f810","title":"Madhya Pradesh: Oil factory owner in Indore arrested for packing palm oil in branded soyabean oil packets","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2021-01-09","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/indore/madhya-pradesh-oil-factory-owner-in-indore-arrested-for-packing-palm-oil-in-branded-soyabean-oil-packets","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.2412010330769901,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["soyabean oil","palm oil"],"issue_types":["substitution","mislabeling","substandard"],"adulterants":["palm oil"],"actions":["arrest","case_registered"],"locations":["Indore, Madhya Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Madhya Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Indore: An oil factory owner was arrested for packing palm oil in the packets of different brands of soyabean and other vegetable oils in Palda area late on Friday. The joint team of food department and administration...","search_text":"$91"},{"article_id":"oil-992710122346e1a9","slug":"oil-992710122346e1a9","title":"15000 litres of adulterated cooking oil seized by FSSAI","source":"timesofindia.indiatimes.com","date":"2019-07-01","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/life-style/food-news/15000-litres-of-adulterated-cooking-oil-seized-by-fssai/photostory/70872567.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.820154357945758,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["groundnut oil","coconut oil","sunflower oil","refined palm olein"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution","dilution"],"adulterants":["refined palm olein"],"actions":["seizure","warehouse sealed"],"locations":["Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India"],"primary_state":"Tamil Nadu","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Adulteration of food is a major concern in most third world countries, and India is no stranger to it. A lot of food products are mixed with foreign agents for a variety of reasons. Milk is often mixed with water, milk...","search_text":"$92"}]}]}]
b:["$","$L93",null,{"children":["$","$94",null,{"name":"Next.MetadataOutlet","children":"$@95"}]}]
96:[]
c:"$W96"
d:["$","$2","h",{"children":[null,["$","$L97",null,{"children":"$L98"}],["$","div",null,{"hidden":true,"children":["$","$L99",null,{"children":["$","$94",null,{"name":"Next.Metadata","children":"$L9a"}]}]}],null]}]
98:[["$","meta","0",{"charSet":"utf-8"}],["$","meta","1",{"name":"viewport","content":"width=device-width, initial-scale=1"}]]
9b:I[6869,[],"IconMark"]
95:null
9a:[["$","title","0",{"children":"Food & Issue Taxonomy | Food Safety Observatory"}],["$","meta","1",{"name":"description","content":"A research interface for Indian food adulteration news evidence, FSSAI baselines and food ontology mapping."}],["$","link","2",{"rel":"icon","href":"/FoodComputing/favicon.ico?603d046c9a6fdfbb","type":"image/x-icon","sizes":"16x16"}],["$","$L9b","3",{}]]
