

================================================================================ARTICLE 1
TITLE: Patanjali's mustard oil unit in Alwar raided by Rajasthan govt: Report
URL: https://www.opindia.com/2021/05/patanjali-mustard-oil-mill-alwar-raided-rajasthan-gehlot/

As the duel between IMA and founder of Patanjali Ramdev Baba intensifies over the latter’s remark on allopathy, it has now been reported that Alwar collectorate officials have raided Patanjali’s mustard oil manufacturer Singhania oil mill.
As per a Republic World report, a raid was conducted on the mill on the orders of Rajasthan Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot. The mill has been sealed after reportedly large quantities of Patanjali’s packing pouches and goods were ‘recovered’ from the site. It is not clear why the unit was raided.
The reason for the raid is unclear, however, the Alwar collectorate has formed an inquiry committee and hinted that the investigation could be given to CB-CID to probe the matter.
IMA- Ramdev Baba tussle
The Indian Medical Association (IMA) headed by Dr Johnrose Austin Jayalal with Congres leader Dr Navjot Singh Dahiya as the National Vice President has launched a targeted attack on Yog Guru Baba Ramdev since his remarks on allopathy.
The conflict between the two, however, has been fueling since the launch of Coronil advocated by the Union Health Minister. The association since then amidst the pandemic has been running a ‘Say No To Mixopathy’ campaign to restrict the entry of Ayurveda and even made the doctors go on a hunger strike.
IMA has now upped the ante after Baba Ramdev’s statement on allopathy and the allopathic doctors went viral on social media, taking strong objection and issuing letter after letter to ministries and state governments to take stern action against him.
After Baba Ramdev’s rebuttal to their concentrated attack, the IMA has now filed a Rs 1000 crore defamation case over his statements.
IMA’s constant attacks against Baba Ramdev and his Patanjali organisation has intensified after recent reports of the IMA President’s open endorsement and support for using medical resources to spread Christianity in India were noticed. In several interviews and statements, the IMA President JA Jayalal has been found calling for proselytization, even going to the extent of declaring that the Covid pandemic is an opportunity to make the masses accept Jesus.

ARTICLE 2
TITLE: Cooking Oil Adulteration: Is your cooking oil adulterated with dangerous metanil yellow colour?
URL: https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/life-style/food-news/is-your-cooking-oil-adulterated-with-dangerous-metanil-yellow-colour/photostory/86060302.cms

FSSAI is back with its weekly lessons on how to check food adulteration at home. In the long run, adulterated food can be deadly and that is the reason, FSSAI has started an initiative called #DetectingFoodAdulterants. In this series, every week they share a simple trick that you can try at home to check whether your food is adulterated or not. This week, they have shared a test video on how to detect the use of a prohibited colour like metanil yellow in cooking oil. Here’s how you can check the adulteration at home. (Image: istock)
1. Take a sample of 1 ml oil in a test tube.
2. Add 4ml of distilled water to it and shake the test tube.
3. Take 2ml of this mixture in another test tube and add 2l of concentrated HCL to the mixture.
4. No colour change will be observed in the upper layer of unadulterated oil.
5. While the colour changes in the upper acid of adulterated oil. (Image: istock)
According to experts, metanil yellow is a non-permitted food colour used extensively in India. According to the National Library of Medicine, metanil yellow is not fit for human consumption. As per an animal study conducted in January 1993 by the journal Food Chemistry and Toxicology, there is a link between long-term consumption of metanil yellow and the levels of serotonin, dopamine and noradrenaline in parts of the brain. It reduces the brain's ability to learn and grasp things. (Image: istock)
As per the FSSAI tweet, HCL acid extracts the prohibited colour, like metanil yellow from the adulterated oil sample and shows colour change in the acid layer, while pure oil does not show any change in colour. (Image: istock)
For scrumptious recipes, videos, and exciting food news, subscribe to our free Daily and Weekly Newsletters.

ARTICLE 3
TITLE: Mumbai DRI seizes heroin worth Rs 125 crore hidden in cooking oil cargo
URL: https://www.mid-day.com/mumbai/mumbai-crime-news/article/mumbai-dri-seizes-heroin-worth-rs-125-crore-hidden-in-cooking-oil-cargo-23195807

Mumbai DRI seizes heroin worth Rs 125 crore hidden in cooking oil cargo
Further investigations led the DRI to businessman Sandeep Thakker in south Mumbai who admitted that he had given his IMPEX Code to a friend, Jayesh Sanghvi in return for a commission of Rs 10,000 on every import order from Iran
Photo for representational purpose
The Directorate of Revenue Intelligence's (DRI) Mumbai unit has seized a consignment of 25 kg heroin concealed in a consignment of groundnut oil at the Nhava Port Trust in Navi Mumbai, and arrested one person, officials said on Friday.
Following a tipoff, the DRI sleuths swooped on the port on October 4 and detected the huge narcotics contraband, valued at Rs 125 crore, among boxes of a cooking oil container arriving from Iran and are now probing the possibility of a bigger drug smuggling racket with international ramifications for India and other countries.

ARTICLE 4
TITLE: FDA urges âbigâ hotels to hand over excess edible oil for bio-diesel | Nagpur News - Times of India
URL: https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/nagpur/fda-urges-big-hotels-to-hand-over-excess-edible-oil-for-bio-diesel/articleshow/88797263.cms

Nagpur: The Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) has urged eight city hotels â where edible oil consumption is more than 50 litres per day â to hand over their excess edible used oils for bio-diesel recycling to a designated company empanelled with the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI).
FDA sources said the hotels have been asked to ensure their excess used oil is sent for recycling through a Mumbai company.
The measure was undertaken as a part of the âEat Rightâ campaign initiated last year which aimed to enforce quality standards of food and eatables being sold at food joints, outlets, eateries and hotels.
FDA assistant commissioner Abhay Deshpande said his team visited around 85 eateries and hotels to conduct on-the-spot tests of the cooking oil with total polar material (TPM) count meter. âThe exercise to check the cooking oil with the TPM meter was to ensure that they were not reused to the extent of becoming hazardous for health,â he said. 
âThough no violations (TPM count more than 25) were found, the hotels and eateries were suggested to follow fair practices by discarding overused oils,â Deshpande added.
As part of the Eat Right campaign, FDA has inspected 1,131 premises related to food business in the city in the last few months. âAround 881 samples were collected from 1,131 food establishments and sent for testing at the government laboratory. The results are awaited. Actions would be initiated as per the degree of violations,â said Deshpande, who is working under the supervision of FDA joint commissioner Suresh Annapure.
As a part of the campaign, FDA has also conducted online training of the 511 anganwadi sevikas (attendants) who prepared food for children.
FDA has also collected 73 samples of loose edible oil available in the market and sent them for testing. Around 18,386kg loose oil worth Rs27,16,673, was seized during the action last year. âOne of the samples collected has been found to be sub-standard by the government analyst, which would now be adjudicated,â said Deshpande.
FDA had conducted pre-audit of cleanliness and hygiene at the food outlets, canteens and cafeteria at around 14 campuses, including those of hospitals, last year. Food safety training and certification (FoSTaC) training, which is part of FSSAI, has been provided to the chefs, canteen supervisors and managers of those 14 premises, said an FDA official.

ARTICLE 5
TITLE: Utta Pradesh: Imported edible oil worth Rs 30 lakh seized in Nanpara | Lucknow News - Times of India
URL: https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/lucknow/imported-edible-oil-worth-rs-30-lakh-seized-in-nanpara/articleshow/88882614.cms

LUCKNOW: A 20-member team of state goods and service tax (SGST) carried out searches at the house, godown and factory of an agricultural products dealer in Nanpara area of Bahraich.
An officer privy to the probe said that searches were being conducted from Tuesday night and the SGST team has detected huge tax evasion. The firm Alok Trading Company had illegally imported edible oil from Nepal and stashed it in two godowns.
The officer said that the SGST team had seized edible oil worth over Rs 30 lakh kept in the two gowdowns. The company was asked to pay a penalty and tax.

ARTICLE 6
TITLE: Vig Raids To Check Edible Oil Hoarding | Vijayawada News - Times of India
URL: https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/vijayawada/vig-raids-to-check-edible-oil-hoarding/articleshow/90039485.cms

Vijayawada/Visakhapatnam: With a view to controlling the price of palmolein oil, other edible oils, oilseeds, and pulses in market, surprise raids were carried out on 126 wholesale and retail traders, supermarkets, and manufacturing units by vigilance & enforcement department officials on Sunday. A series of complaints related to artificial crisis, black marketing and steep rise in prices of edible oil have emerged in the backdrop of Russia-Ukraine conflict.
The raids followed complaints of artificial crisis on the pretext that the supply of sunflower oil got disrupted because of the ongoing conflict between Russia and Ukraine.
India imports nearly 80 to 90 per cent of sunflower oil from Ukraine and Russia.
Speaking to TOI, additional superintendent of vigilance and enforcement department, G Swaroopa Rani, said they have conducted the raids on the big stores and the godowns in various parts of the city to check hoarding of edible oils. âWe didnât observe any illegal trading and artificial crisis of edible oil at the big supermarkets. The raids will continue in some more stores in the city on Monday to check hoarding and keep a tab on the possible illegal trading,â she added.
However, the officials didnât rule out the illegal trade of edible oil at some small shops in the city. It is not possible to carry out raids on the small shops, they added.
Sunflower oil is now priced at 160 to 180 a litre depending on quality. However, some traders are selling it at higher prices citing demand and supply gap due to Russia-Ukraine crisis. Some traders are creating artificial shortage to earn quick money, said K 
Siva Kumar, a resident of Vizag city.

ARTICLE 7
TITLE: Russia-Ukraine war: Vigilance officials raid traders in AP after rise in edible oil prices
URL: https://www.indiatoday.in/india/story/andhra-pradesh-edible-oil-traders-vigilance-raid-hoarding-black-market-ukraine-import-1921765-2022-03-07

Russia-Ukraine war: Vigilance officials raid traders in AP after rise in edible oil prices
Vigilance officials raided traders in Andhra Pradesh after prices of edible oils increased in the state, since the beginning of the Russia-Ukraine war. Cases were registered against traders for hoarding and hiking the prices of edible oils.
The Vigilance and Enforcement Department of Andhra Pradesh launched raids and surprise checks on traders for unauthorised hoarding and trading of palmolein oil, other edible oils, oilseeds and pulses. This comes after the surge in prices of edible oils since the beginning of the Russia-Ukraine war.
On February 6, as many as 126 wholesale traders, retail traders, supermarkets and manufacturing units were inspected by the vigilance officials.
According to officials, 16 cases were registered for hoarding and 15 others were booked for charging excess prices on edible oils. Besides, oil samples were collected for testing the quality.
The officials also warned traders in the state to prevent illegal hoarding of palmolein and other edible oils, pulses and other commodities that causes a surge in prices and creates artificial scarcity.
‘’We will take appropriate action on licensing conditions apart from criminal action," an official said.
As the war between Ukraine and Russia rages on, imports from Ukraine have halted. Andhra Pradesh imports a large quantity of sunflower oil from Ukraine. The black sea region, including Ukraine and Russia, supplies 80 per cent of the world’s crude sunflower and sunflower oils. India alone imports 70 per cent of sunflower oil from Ukraine.
ALSO READ | Ukraine-Russia war in world's 'breadbasket' threatens global food supply
ALSO READ | Oil prices surge above $100 a barrel as war on Ukraine rages

ARTICLE 8
TITLE: 40 Quintal Cooking Oil Seized For Violation Of Rules | Indore News - Times of India
URL: https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/indore/40-quintal-cooking-oil-seized-for-violation-of-rules/articleshow/91716408.cms

Indore: Indore district administration, in a first ever action, late on Friday evening seized a stock of cooking oils worth around Rs 6.5 lakh for the traders failing to maintain a record of the stock and reporting other violations of the rules.
âThe state government has issued Madhya Pradesh Edible Oil and Oilseeds Trade (Control) Order-2022, setting the stock limit of edible oil and oilseeds of soybean, mustard, vegetable, peanut, sunflower and palm for the retail and wholesale tradersâ said ADM Abhay Bedekar.
He added that all the traders/industries, who make a stock of edible oil and oilseeds for purchase and sale, have already been directed to maintain its records including the date, opening stock, arrival, quantity sold, remaining stock and special note (if any) with them and declare the same regularly that will be updated on the central governmentâs department of food and public distributionâs portal
âIn a sudden inspection at Prakash Traders situated in Malharganj area, a team of food department officials late on Friday evening found some violations including not maintaining the record, not exhibiting rate of the cooking oils along with that of stock on a display board and failing to declare information of the stock on the central governmentâs portalâ he said, adding that around 40 quintal oils worth around Rs 6.5 lakh has been seized. He added that a notice will be served to the trader and based on his reply, further course of actions will be decided. TNN

ARTICLE 9
TITLE: FDA warns outlets against repeated use of edible oil | Nagpur News - Times of India
URL: https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/nagpur/fda-warns-outlets-against-repeated-use-of-edible-oil/articleshow/91821386.cms

Nagpur: The Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) has collected 85 samples of edible oil from different eateries, food manufacturers and vendors this year during an ongoing drive against its overuse that can lead to several illnesses like cancer, heart attacks and digestive disorders. 
FDA has warned of penal actions against eateries and food vendors reusing edible oil more than twice.
It has also issued an advisory to eateries and food vendors to use steel utensils, especially for frying, instead of the iron ones which react with edible oil. The agency has also urged the vendors to ensure the food material is not over fried.
The agency has started spot-testing with polarimeter devices for total polar compounds. Asst commissioner, FDA, Prashant Deshmukh said studies have shown overused oils have high polar compounds which in turn increase the trans fat which is one of the reasons for heart blockage and related ailments. âIf the reading is more than 25 then we have to declare the oil unsafe for consumption,â said Deshmukh adding that the food business operators would face action under Food Safety and Standard Act, 2006, and rules 2011.
TOI had earlier reported about FDAâs instructions to food vendors and such business operators, whose edible oil usage is more than 50 litres per day, to hand over the reused cooking medium to designated bio-diesel companies for recycling. Such eateries, food vendors and such business operators also have been asked to maintain a record of their use, stocks and quantity given for recycling purpose.
âWe intend to conduct surprise spot tests of the edible oils at different places ranging from stalls to big eateries to check quality and ensure health of consumers is not compromised,â said Deshmukh.
In May, FDA conducted surprise checks for licences and mandatory food registrations of such business operators at 177 places under Food safety officer Piyush Manwatkar. Around 10 establishments have been pulled up for functioning without licences while 74 were without registrations. 
âFood business operators should approach FDA with Aadhaar card and licence copy to update mailing addresses and mobile phones in their licence and registrations immediately as details of the inspections would be updated online,â said Deshmukh adding FDA is switching to online inspection.

ARTICLE 10
TITLE: FDA cracks down on shop selling reused cooking oil - Deshdoot
URL: https://www.deshdoot.com/deshdoot-times/fda-cracks-down-on-shop-selling-reused-cooking-oil

NASHIK: The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) raided a shop in the Anandavalli area on Monday evening and seized the cooking oil, which is harmful to health. Traders playing with citizens’ health by repeatedly using used cooking oil have now come under the radar of the Food and Drug Administration. Edible oil is suitable for frying if its TPC (Total Polar Compound) meter reading is within 25.
However, if the reading is more than that, the oil is hazardous to health. During the inspection, a sample from Royal Bakers showed an oil reading of 39.5 and concluded that the oil was unhealthy for consumption. The FDA has urged the consumers to be aware and ensure that the oil they use is suitable or not, as the adulterated oil can cause serious disorders like heart disease, high blood pressure, hardening of the arteries, childhood obesity, and diabetes.
FDA officers Vivek Patil and Pramod Patil have taken action and seized samples of the oil used by the baker which is now in the possession of the Reused Cooking Oil (RUCO) organisation. The reused oil has been removed from the pan and seized, which will be given to an agency called RUCO for the production of biodiesel.
Oil samples in lab
The oil samples seized have been sent to the laboratory for testing. Assistant Commissioner Vivek Patil said that appropriate action will be taken against the concerned trader after receiving the report.
“The Government has implemented the concept of ‘Eat Right’ to provide proper and quality food to the citizens. Through this, work will be done on projects of Eat Right School, Eat Right Campus, and Eat Right Station. Through this, a campaign will be undertaken in various parts of the city. The used cooking oil needs to be changed as blackened oil invites diseases.” – Ganesh Parlikar, Assistant Commissioner, FDA, Nashik division

ARTICLE 11
TITLE: SGST Mobile wing conducts search and seizure operation on two edible oil traders in Ludhiana | Ludhiana News - Times of India
URL: https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/ludhiana/sgst-mobile-wing-conducts-search-and-seizure-operation-on-two-edible-oil-traders-in-ludhiana/articleshow/93714405.cms

LUDHIANA: In another anti-evasion operation undertaken by the mobile wing of the State GST (SGST) department on Monday, a search and seizure operation was conducted on two edible oil traders in Ludhiana both of which are related. 
Different teams of department headed by additional commissioner of SGST department Punjab Viraj S Tidke and director enforcement HPS Ghotra simultaneously struck at two offices located in Kesarganj Mandi and JMD Mall today.
The teams were accompanied by heavy police force to assist them in taking the action which has been conducted on suspicion of tax evasion by these firms.
Giving more information, a highly placed source in the department said, âToday a search and seizure operation was carried out at the offices of YK Enterprises and Shree Ashok Enterprises which are located at JMD Mall and in Kesarganj Mandi. The action was conducted after the SGST officials found several discrepancies hinting towards tax evasion in the data mining report generated by them through its special software. Both the entities deal in the business of edible oil of several types and fatty acids and are sister concern owned by the same family. On earlier occasion truck laden with edible oil (which belonged to one of the companies) was intercepted by the SGST department and it was found to be without genuine documents which further led to the suspicion of tax evasion by themâ
Source also added, âIn todayâs action, cache of documents, mobile phones, digital devices, books of accounts have been impounded which will be examined to ascertain the irregularities and the quantum of the tax evasion. The search which was headed personally by additional commissioner Viraj S Tidke and director enforcement HPS Ghotra lasted for about six hours and it is expected that department will earn decent amount of tax and penalty in this case. Further more entities have been identified by SGST department who in the same trade and are involved in the clandestine sales and evasion of tax, action against them is likely very soonâ
State Taxation Officers (STO) Vivek Sood, Satwant Tiwana , Sumeet Thapar , Lakhvir Chahal , Randhir Dhanoa, Saurav Brar and other officers of SGST department were also part of this search and seizure operation.

ARTICLE 12
TITLE: Food Dept Seizes 831l Mustard Oil | Kanpur News - Times of India
URL: https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/kanpur/food-dept-seizes-831l-mustard-oil/articleshow/98439612.cms

Kanpur: Food security and drug administration department on Sunday seized around 831 litre of mustard oil worth Rs 1,14,764 and collected 19 samples of food items and sent them to lab for testing.
The mustard oil was seized from three vendors, and the biggest stock was of a trader in Ghatampur town. The team, led by Ratnakar Singh, food security officer, seized around 799 litre of mustard oil worth Rs 1,11,860.
Another seizure of 22 litre worth Rs 2,904 from a shopkeeper of Maharajpur. 
The team, led by Shantanu Kumar, food security officer, also seized around 34 litre of refined soyabean oil worth Rs 4,420 from the same premises.
According to assistant commissioner 
Vijay Kumar, around 15 teams after roaming in the district collected 19 samples of cheese, mawa, papad, besan, maida, rice bran oil, mixed milk and sweets from 4 vendors.
Singh said raids were conducted in compliance with the orders of commissioner, food security and drug administration to provide pure and standard food items and articles on the occasion of the coming 
Holi festival.

ARTICLE 13
TITLE: Income Tax dept raids on edible oil business group across Bengal, Assam
URL: https://www.indiatoday.in/india/story/west-bengal-income-tax-raid-business-group-rice-bran-oil-2380108-2023-05-16?utm_source=rss

Income Tax dept raids on edible oil business group across Bengal, Assam
The I-T officials seized unaccounted cash of Rs 1.73 crore, along with unaccounted jewellery worth Rs 1 crore during its raid on a West Bengal-based business group.
The Income Tax department has detected Rs 40 crore of unaccounted income after raiding a West Bengal-based business group operating largely in the North Bengal region. The I-T department didn't specify when the raid was conducted but released a statement on the raids and seizures on Tuesday.Â
In its statement, the Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) said that the business group is controlled by a person with an active political background.
Searches were also conducted in the premises of a close associate of the business group. This group is a leading exporter of agro products in the Malda district of North Bengal and isÂ engaged in a variety ofÂ businesses ranging from the production and sale of edible Rice Bran Oil, mustard oil, De-Oiled Rice Bran (DORB), different types of chemicals and real estate, etc.
A total of 23 premises spread over Uttar Dinajpur, Dakshin Dinajpur, Malda, Kolkata, and Siliguri in West Bengal and Guwahati in Assam and surrounding areas were searched.
ALSO READ |Â Maharashtra: CBI registers Rs 1,017-cr bank fraud case against steelmaker Loha Ispaat
The raid revealed that the group was suppressing its yield and making unaccounted cash sales of edible oils and De-Oiled Rice Bran.
Several instances of cash transactions not recorded in regular books of account were detected during the search operation.
Handwritten notes, documents and digital evidence containing extracts of cash transactions were seized. Parallel cash books and bogus claims of expenses have also been found. A preliminary investigation has revealed unaccounted income of more than Rs 40 crore.Â
At the premises of the close business associate of the main business group, incriminating documents against cash payments in land acquisition to the tune of approximately Rs 17 crore were found. Details pertaining to unaccounted cash receipts of about Rs 100 crore were also found.Â
The IT officials seized unaccounted cash of Rs.1.73 crore, along with unaccounted jewellery worth Rs 1 crore during the raids. Further investigations are in progress.

ARTICLE 14
TITLE: Blended edible oil beneficial: FSSAI | Today News
URL: https://www.livemint.com/news/india/blended-edible-oil-beneficial-fssai-11697567700962.html

The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) has said that banning the blending of edible oils, particularly sunflower oil, has no scientific rationale, as there is no food safety or health concern in consuming them.
Instead, the food regulator said in a much-awaited report that blending is beneficial for health, and improves the properties of edible oil.
The FSSAI added that there is not enough data to support the idea that banning blended sunflower oil will increase domestic production of sunflower oil. Also, blended edible oil is more affordable, it said.
An inter-ministerial committee was set up last year under the chairmanship of the special secretary in the health and family welfare ministry to review the blending of edible oils in general and sunflower oil in particular.
This came “after the government found through a field survey that there was an increase in mustard oilseed area post the FSSAI’s ban on the blending of mustard oil for production of multi-sourced edible vegetable oils (MSEVOs) with effect in June 2021,” a member of the committee said on request of anonymity.
In 2021-22, India is estimated to have produced record-high mustard seeds in the rabi, or winter, crop season of 11.9 million tonnes (mt) against the previous year’s 10.2 mt, according to the agriculture ministry.
The FSSAI banned the blending of mustard oil with any oil effective from 8 June 2021 to benefit farmers, provide healthy oil for human consumption and decrease India’s dependence on edible oil imports by increasing production.
“After the healthy situation of mustard farmers and an increase in mustard seed area and subsequently production, the government thought to use it for other oilseed crops. India imports a lot of edible oil. They thought if they improve the production of other oilseed crops, imports of edible oil could be reduced, and this is the reason why they initiated the programme for sunflower oil,” the committee member explained.
India imports around 25 mt of edible oil, nearly 60% of its total annual domestic consumption. The country primarily imports 8 mt of palm oil, 2.7 mt of soybean oil and 2 mt of sunflower oil.
India produces a negligible amount sunflower seeds and sunflower oil against its consumption.
As per the agriculture ministry’s third advance estimate, India produced 204,000 tonnes of sunflower seed in 2022-23 as compared with 111,000 tonnes in the previous year.
Domestic consumption of sunflower oil is 2.5 mt. The huge supply gap is met through imports from countries like Ukraine, Russia and Argentina.
As per the current FSSAI regulations, blending of two edible oils is permitted, provided the proportion by weight of any edible vegetable oil used is at least 20%. Companies are obliged to disclose the blending ratio on the label of the bottle.
“The inter-ministerial committee came up with the report, not public yet, and presented its recommendations to the government. It will now be reviewed by the government and a decision will be taken,” the committee member said.
Queries sent to the FSSAI, the agriculture ministry, the ministry of consumer affairs, food and public distribution, and the ministry of health and family welfare remained unanswered at press time.

ARTICLE 15
TITLE: FDA to ban Brominated Vegetable Oil in soda and food; here’s how it was impacting your health
URL: https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/international/us/fda-to-ban-brominated-vegetable-oil-in-soda-and-food-heres-how-it-was-impacting-your-health/articleshow/104950776.cms

The FDA's stance is rooted in findings from collaborative studies conducted with the National Institutes of Health, revealing potential adverse health effects associated with this commonly used ingredient.
California's Precedent and International Regulations
Notably, California took a pioneering step by banning BVO in October with the passage of the California Food Safety Act. This decisive move underscores growing concerns regarding the safety of BVO. It is important to highlight that BVO has already been banned in Europe and Japan, signifying international acknowledgment of its potential risks.The FDA's Historical Oversight
The FDA had previously authorized the use of BVO in small quantities, with a specific purpose: to prevent the separation of citrus flavors and their ascent to the top of certain beverages. However, in 1970, the FDA reevaluated its stance, determining that BVO no longer merited the label of "Generally Recognized as Safe." Consequently, the FDA commenced regulating its usage as a food additive.Unsettling Findings Prompt the FDA's Proposal
The pivotal turning point leading to the FDA's proposal was an evaluation of both animal and human data, including recent studies supervised by the FDA. These inquiries provided substantial evidence that challenges the safety of BVO in food products. As a result, the FDA declared that BVO no longer meets the safety standards required for food additives.The Transition and Replacement of BVO
To address this regulatory change, many beverage manufacturers have already taken steps to reformulate their products. In doing so, they have replaced BVO with alternative ingredients that are deemed safer and more acceptable. Consequently, these changes have brought forth a transformation in the composition of numerous beverages bringing a change in the taste.The Unsettling Legacy of BVO: Residues and Health Risks
BVO has faced scrutiny for its tendency to leave residues in the body's fat, infiltrating not only the fat content in the brain but also vital organs like the liver. Critically, the Center for Science in the Public Interest, an independent consumer advocacy organization, has raised awareness about BVO's transfer from a nursing mother to her infant through breast milk.This transmission of BVO to infants poses potential health risks, including heart lesions, liver-related issues, and complications in growth and behavioral development.
FAQs:
What is brominated vegetable oil bad for you?Health worries regarding BVO are primarily associated with one of its components, bromine. Bromine has the potential to irritate the skin and mucous membranes, which are the moist linings of the nose, mouth, lungs, and stomach. Extended exposure may result in neurological symptoms such as headaches, memory loss, and challenges in maintaining balance or coordination.
Why is Mountain Dew banned?
Japan and the European Union have prohibited the use of BVO due to its bromine content, which is also present in brominated flame retardants. Accumulation of bromine in the body from BVO can potentially result in issues such as memory loss, as well as skin and nerve problems.
(Catch all the US News, UK News, Canada News, International Breaking News Events, and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)
Download The Economic Times News App to get Daily International News Updates.
(Catch all the US News, UK News, Canada News, International Breaking News Events, and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)
Download The Economic Times News App to get Daily International News Updates.

ARTICLE 16
TITLE: California leads the way as FDA moves to outlaw brominated vegetable oil in sports drinks - Times of India
URL: https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/world/us/california-leads-the-way-as-fda-moves-to-outlaw-brominated-vegetable-oil-in-sports-drinks/articleshow/104949719.cms

In a major development, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has announced its proposal to ban the use of brominated vegetable oil, a once widely used food ingredient found in popular beverages like Gatorade and Mountain Dew, reported NBC News. The move comes in light of mounting evidence linking the chemical to potential health risks, including damage to vital organs such as the liver, heart, and brain.
Brominated vegetable oil is a food additive primarily employed to prevent ingredient separation in fruit-flavored sports drinks and sodas.
It contains bromine, an element also found in flame retardants.
While several industry giants, including Coca-Cola and Pepsi, have already phased out this ingredient from their products, it is still present in some smaller grocery store brands and regional beverages like Sun Drop citrus-flavored soda.
It's important to note that the 
European Union and Japan have already banned the use of brominated vegetable oil in food and beverages, highlighting its potential risks.
Last month, California Governor Gavin Newsom signed a landmark bill into law that prohibited four food additives, including brominated vegetable oil. California became the first state in the U.S. to ban chemicals that the FDA continues to permit.
The FDA's decision, announced on Thursday, is based on recent research findings. Studies in rodents revealed that brominated vegetable oil is toxic to the thyroid, a gland responsible for regulating critical functions like blood pressure, heart rate, and metabolism. Additionally, earlier research had indicated potential harm to the liver, heart, and the possibility of neurological issues associated with this additive.
The FDA stated, "Based on these data and remaining unresolved safety questions, the FDA can no longer conclude that the use of BVO in food is safe," in an official release.
As far back as 1970, the FDA had removed brominated vegetable oil from the list of substances considered "Generally Recognized as Safe and Effective" due to concerns regarding its potential harm to the body. Nevertheless, the agency had allowed its continued use on an "interim" basis.
The FDA has invited public comments on the proposed rule, with the comment period open until January 17. If the ban receives approval, the agency has indicated that it will provide beverage manufacturers with at least one year to reformulate or relabel their products in compliance with the new rule.
In addition to the brominated vegetable oil ban, the FDA has also stated its intention to reassess the potential cancer risk associated with red dye No. 3, a synthetic food coloring that was part of California's recent food additives ban.

ARTICLE 17
TITLE: The mustard oil mystery: Why is it banned in the US and Europe?
URL: https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/life-style/health-fitness/health-news/the-mustard-oil-mystery-why-is-it-banned-in-the-us-and-europe/photostory/106086699.cms

The underrated mustard seed, better known as strong and spicy condiment, has a valuable oil hidden inside. While many nations, such as Thailand and India, use edible mustard oil in their cooking, the US and Europe have expressed concern and outlawed its use in food for human consumption. Let's explore the controversy surrounding mustard oil, including its unique properties, rich history, and the reasons it was outlawed in the West.
An ancient spice that dates back to the Stone Age, mustard has been incorporated into many different cultures. Mustard has developed with human civilization, starting with the Romans who created tart sauces and continuing with the French who created Grey Poupon Dijon. Beyond their reputation as a condiment, mustard seeds contain an oil with a unique composition that can be used for a wide range of purposes, including cosmetics and cooking.
With its high proportion of monounsaturated fats, balanced amounts of omega-3 and omega-6 polyunsaturated fats, and low levels of saturated fats, mustard seed oil has a heart-healthy composition. Its anti-inflammatory, antibacterial, and analgesic qualities make it a star in cosmetic and pharmaceutical formulations, even outside the kitchen. But the same substances that provide these advantages also give rise to worries about possible toxicity at larger concentrations.
Read also: Is diabetes reversal possible?
Erucic acid and glucosinolates were found to be the cause of mustard oil's strong flavor during research conducted in the 1950s. Although the mustard plant uses these substances as natural defenses, elevated erucic acid concentrations raised concerns about possible cardiac problems in mice. Despite the lack of clarity surrounding the effects on humans, regulatory bodies such as the FDA acted and prohibited edible mustard oil due to its high erucic acid content.
The FDA reclassified mustard oil as "for external use only" in the US due to health concerns, limiting its use to products for skincare and haircare. While some nations still use mustard oil in their cooking, the West has shifted to using soybean oil instead, which is high in Omega-3 and Omega-6 fatty acids and promotes collagen, flexibility, and general skin health.
Efforts are being made to lessen the amount of erucic acid in mustard oil because of its possible health benefits. Canola oil originated from a low-erucic acid cultivar that was developed by Canadian researchers. FDA approval of a particular brand of edible mustard seed oil with reduced levels of erucic acid may indicate a change in the agency's regulatory positions.
There is hope for a safer and healthier mustard oil thanks to advancements in processing techniques within the oil industry. The journey of mustard seed oil is being discussed and may eventually be reexamined and accepted in the culinary world.
Read also: Mouth ulcer remedies for quick relief

ARTICLE 18
TITLE: Maharashtra FDA cracks down on McDonald's, catches fast food major using cheap vegetable oil in place of cheese
URL: https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/industry/cons-products/food/maha-fda-cracks-down-on-mcdonalds-catches-fast-food-major-using-cheap-vegetable-oil-in-place-of-cheese/articleshow/107934081.cms

Cheese analogues are designed to replicate the taste and texture of traditional dairy cheese, often substituting dairy fat with more cost-effective vegetable oil. The FDA claims that McDonald's failed to disclose the use of cheese analogues on food labels or electronic display boards, potentially posing health risks to consumers.
FDA commissioner Abhimanyu Kale told TOI, "During the inspection, our officers did not find any mention of cheese analogues anywhere. Items like 'cheese nuggets', 'cheesy dip', and 'cheeseburger' were being labelled as such without indicating that the cheese was a substitute," he said. "Most other fast food pizza and burger joints could be indulging in the same practice. We plan to investigate these chains as well."
The inspection of a McDonald's branch in Ahmednagar in October revealed at least eight items containing cheese analogues. Despite McDonald's contesting the action, the outlet's licence was suspended due to an unsatisfactory explanation. McDonald’s wrote to the FDA in Dec that they have renamed the products by removing the word "cheese," but the FDA is pushing for broader investigations into similar practices by other fast-food chains.
As per the TOI report, McDonald’s has now denied using substitutes. “...we want to reassure customers that we use only real, quality cheese in all our products,” a spokesperson said.
Here's what McDonald's said
Westlife Foodworld issued a clarification saying that it is actively engaging with the competent authorities on this issue and awaiting their final clarification.
"We have always been adhering to stringent food standards and are fully compliant with all applicable food laws. Our commitment to transparency in our ingredients and dedication to providing delicious, high-quality meals to our customers remains unwavering," the company said.
Westlife Foodworld handles McDonald's' franchises across 62 cities in southern and western India. Shares of Westlife Foodworld closed with a cut of over 2 per cent while the benchmark indices ended muted with a negative bias.
With inputs from TOI
(Catch all the Business News, Breaking News and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)
Subscribe to The Economic Times Prime and read the ET ePaper online.
(Catch all the Business News, Breaking News and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)
Subscribe to The Economic Times Prime and read the ET ePaper online.

ARTICLE 19
TITLE:  Fast-food giant replacing cheese with cheaper vegetable oil: Maharashtra FDA | India News - The Times of India
URL: https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/fast-food-giant-replacing-cheese-with-cheaper-vegetable-oil-maharashtra-fda/articleshow/107923964.cms

MUMBAI: Maharashtra FDA has cracked down on fast food giant McDonald's, slamming it for a cheesy deception - using substitutes in burgers and nuggets instead of real cheese. It has suspended the license of a McDonald's outlet in Ahmednagar, prompting the chain to erase the word "cheese" from various items. FDA is pushing the chain to extend the corrective action state-wide & even nationally.
Cheese alternatives, or cheese analogues, are designed to replicate taste, texture, and functionality of traditional dairy cheese. The substitutes, allegedly identified in several McDonald's items, typically replace milk or dairy fat with cost-effective vegetable oil. The food regulator has accused McDonald's of using cheese analogues without proper disclosure on food labels or on electronic display boards, thereby "misleading" people into thinking they are eating real cheese.
FDA commissioner Abhimanyu Kale told TOI the omission of such crucial details is outright misleading for consumers and could have health implications. "During inspection, our officers did not find any mention of cheese analogues anywhere. Items like 'cheese nuggets', 'cheesy dip', and 'cheese burger' were being labelled as such without indicating that the cheese was a substitute," he said. "Most other fast food pizza and burger joints could be indulging in the same practice. We plan to investigate these chains as well."
The action against McDonald's started in Oct with an inspection of their Kedgaon branch in Ahmednagar. FDA issued a show-cause notice to the establishment upon discovering at least eight items contained cheese analogues. Despite McDonald's contesting the action, the outlet's license was suspended as their explanation was deemed unsatisfactory. McDonald's wrote to FDA in Dec saying they have renamed the products by deleting the word "cheese". But when TOI contacted McDonald's Thursday, it denied using substitutes. "...we want to reassure customers that we use only real, quality cheese in all our products," a spokesperson said.

ARTICLE 20
TITLE: Fake cheese? McDonald's responds after vegetable oil found in burgers and nuggets
URL: https://www.indiatoday.in/business/story/mcdonalds-responds-to-fake-cheese-crackdown-maharashtra-fda-2506260-2024-02-23?utm_source=rss

Fake cheese? McDonald's responds after vegetable oil found in burgers and nuggets
The Maharashtra FDA found McDonald's outlets serving cheese analogues in some products like burgers and nuggets, leading to the suspension of one outlet's license.
Fast-food giant McDonald’s has assured customers that it only uses genuine and high-quality cheese in its cheese-containing products, following a crackdown on some of its outlets in Maharashtra by the state’s Food & Drugs Administration (FDA).
The Maharashtra FDA has found some of the fast-food giant’s outlets in the state to be serving an alternative of cheese, also known as cheese analogues, in some of its products, such as burgers and nuggets.Â
It may be noted that cheese analogues are basically made to mimic the taste and texture of traditional dairy cheese and often replace diary fat with more economical vegetable oil.Â
Maharashtra FDA commissioner Abhimanyu Kale said, "We had recieved feedback from the customer regarding the use of cheese analogues instead of real cheese. After which we inspected and found the use of vegetable oil (Dalda oil) instead of real cheese."
This reportedly led to the suspension of the licence of one of McDonald’s outlets in the state.Â The FDA in Maharashtra suspended the licence of a McDonald's outlet in Ahmednagar for using cheese analogues instead of real cheese.
This also led to the chain removing the word "cheese" from various locations where analogues were used. Cheese analogues are more cost-effective, utilising vegetable oil to save on costs.
McDonald's responds
Westlife Foodworld Limited, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Hardcastle Restaurants Private Limited and operator of McDonald's chains in west and south India, has released a statement to the stock exchanges in response to the report.
“Amid recent reports about the removal of 'Cheese' from our menu at McDonald's locations in Maharashtra, we want to assure our valued customers that only genuine, high-quality cheese is used in all our cheese-containing products,” the company said.Â
“Collaborating with suppliers adhering to global standards ensures top-quality cheese in our product offerings and not cheese analogues or any substitute. We are actively engaging with the competent authorities on this issue and awaiting their final clarification,” the McDonald’s operator added.
The statement went on to highlight that the company adheres to stringent food standards and are “fully compliant” with all applicable food laws.Â
“Our commitment to transparency in our ingredients and dedication to providing delicious, high-quality meals to our customers remain unwavering."

ARTICLE 21
TITLE: 'Use only milk-based real cheese,' McDonald's says after Maharashtra FDA accuses fast food giant of using vegetable oil - Times of India
URL: https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/business/india-business/use-only-milk-based-real-cheese-mcdonalds-says-after-maharashtra-fda-accuses-fast-food-giant-of-using-vegetable-oil/articleshow/107958419.cms

NEW DELHI: Amid allegations of using substitutes instead of real cheese, McDonald's asserted they use quality cheese and also emphasised its commitment to ingredients transparency as well as high quality meals.
In a statement released by McDonaldâs India (West & South) stated that "Amid recent reports about the removal of 'Cheese' from our menu at McDonald's locations in Maharashtra, we want to assure our valued customers that only genuine, high-quality cheese is used in all our cheese-containing products.
Collaborating with suppliers adhering to global standards ensures top-quality cheese in our product offerings and not cheese analogues or any substitute. We are actively engaging with the competent authorities on this issue and awaiting their final clarification. We have always been adhering to stringent food standards and are fully compliant with all applicable food laws. Our commitment to transparency in our ingredients and dedication to providing delicious, high-quality meals to our customers remain unwavering."
 On Thursday, the Maharashtra FDA has suspended the license of a McDonald's outlet in Ahmednagar after discovering the use of substitutes in burgers and nuggets instead of real cheese. In response, the chain removed the term "cheese" from various items at the affected location. The FDA is urging McDonald's to expand the corrective measures beyond the specific outlet, advocating for a state-wide and potentially national implementation.
McDonald's took to X officially known as Twitter, asserting they use only real, quality cheese and emphasising their commitment to ingredient transparency and high-quality meals. However, the accuracy of these claims may require further scrutiny through independent investigations or regulatory actions. The unfolding events will determine how McDonald's addresses the concerns raised by the FDA.
FDA commissioner Abhimanyu Kale, told TOI on the omission of such crucial details is outright misleading for consumers and could have health implications. "During inspection, our officers did not find any mention of cheese analogues anywhere. Items like 'cheese nuggets', 'cheesy dip', and 'cheese burger' were being labelled as such without indicating that the cheese was a substitute," he said. "Most other fast food pizza and burger joints could be indulging in the same practice. We plan to investigate these chains as well."
McDonald's wrote to FDA in December saying they have renamed the products by deleting the word "cheese". They renamed cheesy nuggets as veg nuggets, McCheese veg burger as cheddar delight veg burger, blueberry cheese cake as blueberry cake, among others. A few outlets in Santacruz, Kurla and Bhendi Bazar have started displaying the new names. 
But when TOI contacted Mc Donald's on Thursday, the company denied using substitutes. "Regarding the removal of the word 'cheese' from our menu at McDonald's stores in Maharashtra, we want to reassure our customers that we use only real, quality cheese in all our products containing cheese. "

ARTICLE 22
TITLE: Explained: Why consumption of mustard oil is banned in the US and Europe - The Times of India
URL: https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/life-style/food-news/explained-why-consumption-of-mustard-oil-is-banned-in-the-us-and-europe/articleshow/111333738.cms

Indian cuisine is full of aroma and flavours. From spices to oils, traditional Indian kitchen celebrates all things healthy that have medicinal properties too. One such item that is used in most Indian homes is mustard oil. A cooking oil, known for its pungent aroma and sharp flavour. It is an Indian staple used in raw and cooked form to enhance the taste of many dishes. While we continue to enjoy the aroma of this oil, sadly it is banned in the US and many other countries. Scroll down to know why. 
Why is mustard oil banned in the US?According to the US Food And Drug Administration, the amount of erucic acid in mustard oil is quite high. It is a type of fatty acid and is detrimental to health purposes. It is not metabolised properly and harms the brain cells as well. Erucic acid is also associated with many mental disorders like memory impairment. It also leads to the increased accumulation of fat in the body. Keeping in mind these purposes, the USA, Canada, and Europe have banned the consumption of mustard oil.
Also Read: This is how warm Mustard oil can be used for healing What is erucic acid?Erucic acid is a monounsaturated omega-9 fatty acid commonly found in oils such as mustard oil, rapeseed oil, and wallflower seed oil. 
As per studies, higher consumption of erucic acid can lead to several potential health side effects which are explained below. 
Cardiotoxicity: High levels of erucic acid have been linked to the development of myocardial lipidosis, a condition characterized by the accumulation of fat in heart muscle cells, which can impair heart function.
Liver damage: Excessive intake of erucic acid may lead to liver enlargement and the development of fatty liver disease, which can disrupt normal liver function.
Growth retardation: In animal studies, high levels of erucic acid have been associated with growth retardation and reduced weight gain, raising concerns about its effects on growth and development in humans, especially in children.
Reproductive issues: Some animal studies suggest that high levels of erucic acid might adversely affect reproductive health, although more research is needed to fully understand these effects in humans.
Gastrointestinal distress: Consuming large amounts of erucic acid might cause gastrointestinal issues, including diarrhea, stomach cramps, and nausea.
Potential carcinogenicity: While not conclusively proven, there is some concern about the potential carcinogenic effects of long-term consumption of high levels of erucic acid.
Also Read:Mustard oil best for heart: StudyWhat is the current status?As per reports, the countries that have banned the use of mustard oil are trying to address the safety measures. Ad per Anderson International Corp, research and development are underway to reduce the erucic acid content in this oil. Also, as per Canadian researchers, they developed a low-erucic acid cultivar of rapeseed in the 1950s, and they named it Canola, which is a short acronym for Canadian oil with low acid. The FDA has approved one brand of edible mustard seed oil. This brand is produced from a cultivar bred explicitly for its low levels of erucic acid.
Benefits of mustard oilContains compounds like selenium, which have anti-inflammatory properties and may help reduce inflammation in the body. Inhalation of steam with mustard oil can help relieve congestion and improve respiratory health, acting as a decongestant. Mustard oil has natural antibacterial and antifungal properties that can help protect against infections when consumed. Also, it can stimulate the production of digestive juices and bile, improving digestion and appetite. The oil has anti-inflammatory properties that can help reduce inflammation in the body, potentially alleviating conditions such as arthritis. The vitamin E content in mustard oil helps in maintaining healthy skin by reducing inflammation, promoting wound healing, and protecting the skin from environmental damage.
Is there any other side effect of mustard oil?Consuming large amounts of mustard oil can lead to digestive issues like stomach upset, diarrhea, and indigestion due to its strong and pungent nature. Also, mustard oil contains goitrogens, substances that can interfere with the function of the thyroid gland. Consuming large quantities of mustard oil may contribute to the development of goiters or exacerbate existing thyroid problems.
What's the solution?As per experts, whether it's oil or any packaged food item, one should be careful and should always read the label and nutritional content of the item before adding it to their pantry. Here are some of the practical solutions that people can adhere to while buying mustard oil from their nearest store. 
Read the labels carefully: It is suggested to opt for processed mustard oil that has undergone low-erucic acid treatment, which is safer for human consumption. 
Source wisely: As per experts, one should invest time in buying any item and look for reputable brands that ensure freshness and control over ingredients.
Moderation is key: Whether it is oil or any spice, it is suggested to consume them in moderation as part of a balanced diet.
Thumb and Embed Images Courtesy: istock

ARTICLE 23
TITLE: US FDA to ban use of brominated vegetable oil in food, soda
URL: https://indianexpress.com/article/world/us-fda-to-ban-use-of-brominated-vegetable-oil-in-food-soda-9429422/

The U.S. Food and Drug Administration said on Tuesday it would revoke the regulation that authorized the use of brominated vegetable oil in food items, effective Aug. 2, as it was no longer safe.
BVO is a chemical ingredient containing bromine, which is found in fire retardants.
Small quantities of BVO are used legally in some citrus-flavored drinks in the United States to keep the flavor evenly distributed.
The FDA said it had concluded that BVO was not safe for use after the results of studies, it conducted in collaboration with the National Institutes of Health, found the potential for adverse effects in humans.
The agency had first proposed to revoke the regulation in November last year.
According to the Center for Science in the Public Interest, BVO was banned in the UK in 1970, followed by India in 1990, the EU in 2008 and Japan in 2010.
In 1970, the FDA had concluded that its use in food was not generally recognized as safe because of toxicity concerns. After this, the agency began regulating BVO as a food additive, while simultaneously conducting safety studies.
“The FDA’s new regulation to not allow BVO as a food additive is a terrific positive in the right direction,” said Michael Ashley Schulman, chief investment officer at Running Point Capital Advisors.
As per FDA rules, whenever a company was using the ingredient in any product, it was necessary to list it on the label.
Over time, many beverage makers have replaced BVO with an alternative ingredient, according to the FDA. “Today, few beverages in the U.S. contain BVO,” it said.
“We are aware of the recent FDA action regarding the use of BVO in food. Walmart has been working with private brand suppliers to reformulate products,” a Walmart spokesperson told Reuters in an emailed statement.
“Currently, there are very few Walmart private brands items that still contain BVO, and we expect them to be reformulated in advance of the FDA compliance date,” the spokesperson added.
PepsiCo and Coca-Cola have removed BVO from their drinks such as Gatorade and Fanta, respectively.
“Sun Drop, manufactured by Keurig Dr Pepper, still uses BVO … This is probably the biggest national brand that still uses it,” said CFRA Research’s Arun Sundaram.
Keurig Dr Pepper did not immediately respond to a Reuters request for comment.

ARTICLE 24
TITLE: FSSAI issues notices to 55 edible oil manufacturers | Ahmedabad News - Times of India
URL: https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/ahmedabad/fssai-issues-notices-to-55-edible-oil-manufacturers/articleshow/111591411.cms

Ahmedabad: FSSAI Gujarat issued notices to 55 edible oil manufacturers, restraining them from using old tins. These 55 include almost all refiners and re-packers. 
Sources said the Gujarat food and drug control administration (FDCA) and 
FSSAI have asked manufacturers to only use new tins for edible oils, but many are still reusing tins. 
FSSAI notice states, âIn the interest of food safety and to prevent potential hazards from metal contact with food, it has come to our attention that many food business operators (FBOs) involved in the manufacturing, re-labelling, repackaging, trading or any other food handling activities (specifically edible oil) continue to use old tin containers for packaging purposes.
As stipulated in the Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulation of 2018, tin containers once used, shall not be re-used for packaging of food.â H G Koshia, commissioner of the Gujarat FDCA, said, âAccording to the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India, the reuse of container tins for packaging food is prohibited.â 
We also published the following articles recently

ARTICLE 25
TITLE: Food safety scandal: Fuel tanker trucks used to transport cooking oil in China, suggests report - Times of India
URL: https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/world/china/food-safety-scandal-fuel-tanker-trucks-used-to-transport-cooking-oil-in-china-suggests-report/articleshow/111628414.cms

China's food safety commission is set to investigate the reported use of fuel tanker trucks for transporting cooking oil, the state media reported. The revelation has sparked harsh criticism and raised fears of food contamination in a nation that numerous food and drug safety scandals have shaken in recent decades. 
According to CNN, the scandal involves China's largest grain storage and transport company, Sinograin, and private conglomerate, Hopefull Grain and Oil Group. Both companies have said that investigations are underway.
The Beijing News, a local daily, reported last week that Sinograin's fuel tankers were discovered transporting food products such as cooking oil, soybean oil, and syrup without properly cleaning the tankers between shipments. In response to the allegations, the food safety commission will convene a special meeting with the National Development and Reform Commission, the State Administration of Grain and Reserves, and other ministries to discuss and investigate the matter, as reported by state broadcaster CCTV.
CCTV said, "Illegal enterprises and relevant responsible persons will be severely punished under the law and will not be tolerated."
Chinese food products have faced domestic and international scrutiny following a series of scandals, particularly the deadly milk scandal in 2008, where infant formula was found to contain the industrial chemical melamine. To improve food safety controls and reassure importers, Beijing has taken steps to address these issues, while some Chinese consumers have turned to foreign brands perceived as more trustworthy.
The Beijing News referred to the cooking oil issue as an "open secret" in the transport industry, and CCTV described it as "tantamount to poisoning."
Massive public outcry
On China's heavily censored social media platforms, many citizens called for product recalls and increased industry oversight. Some also seemed to connect the situation to broader issues in the country, where an economic downturn is fueling social frustration, and there are deep-rooted concerns about the lack of accountability for powerful and government-linked entities.
Despite improvements in living standards over recent decades, food safety remains an ongoing concern in China. Local media has reported dozens of high-profile scandals, prompting stricter government regulation.

ARTICLE 26
TITLE: What is the cooking oil contamination scandal in China? Here's all you need to know
URL: https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/international/us/what-is-the-cooking-oil-contamination-scandal-in-china-heres-all-you-need-to-know/articleshow/111669695.cms

Netizens react on Weibo
Quoting an unnamed driver, the news outlet reported that this practice was prevalent and open and a kind of 'open secret' in the industry. This subject kept on trending for quite some time on Chinese social media. Tens of thousands of netizens took to Weibo - the country’s equivalent to X and expressed their views. A Weibo user wrote, "Food safety is the most important issue." This comment was liked more than 8,000 times. Another user posted, "As an ordinary person, surviving in this world itself is an amazing thing already." Someone else wrote, "This is much worse than the Sanlu scandal, it can’t be settled with just a statement."State-run companies involved
In principle, tankers carrying one substance can carry another substance because they are not limited to any particular type of food. But a tanker must be washed and decontaminated properly before using it for carrying food items. This was not done in this case. It may snowball into a major scandal as many major Chinese companies including a subsidiary of state-owned Sinograin and the Hopefull Grain and Oil Group are involved in it. Sinograin has claimed to have launched an investigation into the matter.Talking to state-run 'Global Times', a representative of Hopefull Grain said that the company has launched a "thorough self-inspection". Similarly, the Chinese government has said that food safety officials will investigate the allegations. The Hebei and Tianjin provincial governments too have said that they will investigate the matter.
FAQs
How the government has reacted to allegedly carrying food items by tankers used for transporting fuel?The Chinese government has said that food safety officials will investigate the allegations. The Hebei and Tianjin provincial governments too have said that they will investigate the matter.
What was the Sanlu milk scandal?
(Catch all the US News, UK News, Canada News, International Breaking News Events, and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)
Download The Economic Times News App to get Daily International News Updates.
(Catch all the US News, UK News, Canada News, International Breaking News Events, and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)
Download The Economic Times News App to get Daily International News Updates.

ARTICLE 27
TITLE: Punjab &amp; Haryana high court asks Centre if they plan to open more labs to check cooking oil adulteration
URL: https://www.hindustantimes.com/cities/chandigarh-news/punjab-haryana-high-court-asks-centre-if-there-are-plans-to-open-more-labs-to-check-cooking-oil-adulteration-101734204296975.html

Punjab & Haryana high court asks Centre if they plan to open more labs to check cooking oil adulteration
The court was hearing a 2015 public interest litigation (PIL) by a Kapurthala resident Rajesh Gupta
The Punjab and Haryana high court (HC) has directed the Centre to apprise the court whether it has plans to open more laboratories to check adulteration of miscible oil in cooking oils available in the market.
Also Read: Adulterated mustard oil behind 3 dropsy deaths in Nabha: report
The HC bench of chief justice Sheel Nagu and justice Anil Kshetarpal termed it “unfortunate” that despite edible oils of different types being consumed in very large quantities throughout the country, the nearest laboratory to conduct the aforesaid test is situated nearly 1,500 kms from Chandigarh, in Nagpur.
Also Read: Delhi govt to intensify checks on food adulteration amid festive season
The court was hearing a 2015 public interest litigation (PIL) by a Kapurthala resident Rajesh Gupta, who had alleged that wholesale dealers, oil millers and wholesale traders in the trade of edible mustard oil were playing havoc with the lives of the people and providing ‘poison in the form of food’ which was not fit for human consumption by blatantly ignoring provisions of the Food Safety Act. “… various firms in Punjab were selling adulterated mustard oil by labelling it as ‘pure refined mustard oil’ which could be sold in the market for human consumption. Some firms were selling ‘refined rice bran oil’ as ‘mustard oil’ in order to deceive the public and maximise profits,” he had submitted, further alleging that the millers were working in violation of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006, and even Agmark, a certification mark, was being misused by traders in violation of the Act.
Also Read: Gautam Budh Nagar: 370 kg sweets, 750 ltr oil seized in food safety checks
During the course of the PIL, some samples were sent for examination to the Regional Agmark Laboratory, Amritsar. However, the lab said that the tests for other miscible oil as possible adulterants and percentage thereof were not performed as there was no availability of required facilities in this laboratory. For the same, samples can be sent to Central Agmark Laboratory, Nagpur, for analysis.
Additional solicitor general Satya Pal Jain, who was asked to check where samples could be sent, had told the court that the nearest laboratory where the test for other miscible oil can be conducted is the Central Agmark Laboratory, Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, North Ambajari Road, Nagpur.
The court expressed its displeasure over the lab being 1,500 km away from Chandigarh and asked Jain to apprise the court by January 22 as to what is the present policy of the central government and whether there is proposal for opening other laboratories across the country and if not then why.

ARTICLE 28
TITLE: NHRC issues notice to FSSAI over rampant reuse of cooking oil by eateries
URL: https://www.indiatoday.in/health/story/nhrc-issues-notice-to-fssai-over-rampant-reuse-of-cooking-oil-by-eateries-2807276-2025-10-23?utm_source=rss

NHRC issues notice to FSSAI over rampant reuse of cooking oil by eateries
Despite years of public awareness campaigns, small food joints and roadside vendors continue to use cooking oil multiple times, leading to a massive public health challenge, says India's top human rights body.
The National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) has issued a notice to the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) over widespread violations of norms governing the reuse of cooking oil.
Despite years of public awareness campaigns, small food joints and roadside vendors continue to use cooking oil multiple times, a practice that India’s top human rights body has termed a serious public health concern and a violation of basic human rights.
In a notice dated October 22, the NHRC sought state-wise data and an action-taken report from the FSSAI within two weeks.
The move follows a complaint by Sarthak Samudayik Vikas Evam Jan Kalyan Sanstha, a Bhopal-based non-governmental organization, which alleged that the FSSAI’s Repurpose Used Cooking Oil (RUCO) campaign has failed to curb the reuse of degraded oil, particularly among smaller food businesses and street vendors.
“We found the allegation to be correct prima facie and understand it to be a nationwide problem that needs to be tackled immediately by the FSSAI and state food regulators in the interest of public health,” NHRC member Priyank Kanoongo, whose bench issued the notice, told India Today.
India Today has reached out to FSSAI CEO Rajit Punhani for comment. This report will be updated if and when a response is received.
COOKING OIL NORMS AND HEALTH RISKS
Under the Food Safety and Standards (Licensing and Registration of Food Businesses) Regulations, 2011, amended in 2018, cooking oil becomes unfit for consumption when its Total Polar Compounds (TPC) exceed 25 percent.
TPCs are toxic substances formed when oils degrade due to repeated heating, especially during frying. The longer the oil is exposed to high temperatures and moisture, the higher the TPC level becomes.
Scientific studies have linked the consumption of food fried in oil with high TPC levels to a range of chronic health problems including hypertension, atherosclerosis, liver disease, Alzheimer’s, and certain cancers. Reheating oil also raises the trans-fat content, further compounding health risks.
INDIA’S MASSIVE OIL CONSUMPTION
India is among the largest consumers of vegetable oil in the world. Government data estimates the country’s annual consumption at nearly 2,500 crore litres, with nearly 60 percent used in households and the remaining 40 percent in commercial establishments such as hotels, restaurants, and food stalls.
The enormous volume of oil used in the food industry makes effective regulation of used cooking oil critical to safeguarding public health and the environment.
WIDESPREAD NON-COMPLIANCE BY FOOD BUSINESSES
According to FSSAI norms, commercial eateries and food businesses that use more than 50 litres of oil per day must monitor and document the quality of oil they use.
Once the oil’s TPC exceeds 25 percent, it must be disposed of through authorized collection agencies and kept out of the food chain. These agencies are registered with state biodiesel boards or other authorized bodies designated by state governments.
Additionally, used oil must be stored in clearly labelled containers to prevent cross-contamination and must never be poured into drains or sewage systems.
Smaller food businesses are advised not to reuse oil more than three times, and preferably only once.
They are also instructed to discard oil when it becomes dark, foamy, or emits blue-grey smoke—all signs of deterioration.
For households, FSSAI advises filtering oil once used for frying and using it only for cooking curries, while avoiding its reuse for frying.
Despite these clear regulations, the Bhopal-based complainant told the NHRC that reuse and resale of cooking oil remain rampant. Many eateries reportedly sell or dispose of used oil improperly, allowing it to re-enter the food chain or contaminate soil and water sources, creating both health and environmental hazards.
THE RUCO CAMPAIGN AND ITS GAPS
In 2018, the FSSAI launched the Repurpose Used Cooking Oil (RUCO) initiative to aid the National Policy on Biofuels.
The campaign aimed to create an organized ecosystem for collecting used cooking oil and converting it into biodiesel—a renewable fuel derived from vegetable oils, animal fats, or used cooking oil. The policy set an indicative target of 5 percent biodiesel blending into diesel by 2030, with the dual goal of reducing environmental pollution and promoting energy self-sufficiency.
To implement RUCO, FSSAI developed an Education, Enforcement, and Ecosystem (EEE) strategy designed to educate food business operators about the health hazards of reused oil, and implement compliance through regular inspections and penalties.
The other element of the scheme included building a collection network linking restaurants with biodiesel manufacturers and aggregators.
However, the complaint to the NHRC alleges that the RUCO initiative has barely reached ground level, especially in smaller towns and unorganized sectors.
While larger restaurant chains and food companies are more likely to follow FSSAI standards, thousands of small eateries and roadside vendors reportedly operate without monitoring, documentation, or awareness of TPC norms, some insiders in the regulator also conceded.

ARTICLE 29
TITLE: NHRC notice to Health Ministry, FSSAI on 'widespread reuse of cooking oil'
URL: https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/india/nhrc-notice-to-health-ministry-fssai-on-widespread-reuse-of-cooking-oil/articleshow/124790502.cms

The National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) directed a probe into the allegations and the furnishing of a state-wise report according to the proceedings of the case. It asked to submit an action taken report within two weeks.
The allegations made in the complaint prima facie seem to be "violations" of the human rights of the victims, reads the proceedings, dated October 22.
The complainant, founder of Sarthak Samudayik Vikas Evam Jan Kalyan Sanstha, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh, has raised "serious concerns about the widespread reuse of cooking oil in India".
He pointed out that despite FSSAI's 'RUCO -- Repurpose Used Cooking Oil' campaign and policies promoting bio-diesel at the ground level, small hotels, roadside eateries and food vendors allegedly "repeatedly reuse or resell used cooking oil, which poses severe public health risks, including cancer, heart diseases and liver disorders," it says.
"The Registry is directed to issue a notice to the chairman, Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, government of India, New Delhi, with directions to get the allegations made in the complaint inquired into, and to provide a state-wise report, in the matter," it says.
It has also asked to submit an action taken report within two weeks for the perusal of the Commission.

ARTICLE 30
TITLE: NHRC issues notice to FSSAI over rampant reuse of cooking oil by eateries
URL: https://www.en.etemaaddaily.com/health/nhrc-issues-notice-to-fssai-over-rampant-reuse-of-cooking-oil-by-eateries:183618

Urdu
Matrimonials
Classifieds
World
Business
Sports
Entertainment
Health
Crime
Edu and Jobs
Politics
Photos
Videos
Menu
Home
>
Health
Thu 01 Jan 1970
Share
Tweet
No Comments For This Post, Be first to write a Comment.
Leave a Comment
Most viewed from
Health
Chewing sugary gum after beetroot could lower blood pressure: Study...
Cervical cancer deaths in young women fall to zero after HPV vaccination: Study...
Rusty and broken knives can spread diseases, says FSSAI...
Kerala reports 2 more Shigella deaths, toll rises to 5; cases climb to 147...
FSSAI flags misleading organic and zero maida claims by food brands...
Giving kids eggs at six months could reduce allergy risk: Study...
Fresh Nipah virus case reported in Kerala...
New drug shows promise in preventing muscle loss amid GLP-1 boom...
Govt allows higher prices for key cancer drugs amid shortages...
Smoking increases bladder cancer risk by up to four times: Urologist...
Birth control pills may reduce ovarian cancer by 50%, but raise breast cancer risk...
Persistent acidity and weight loss could be early signs of GI cancer...
Todays Epaper
English Weekly
AIMIM News
Asaduddin Owaisi Demands EC Accept PAN, Driving Licence And Ration Cards For Verification In SIR
Jun 11, 2026
AIMIM Qutbullapur President Mohammed Muneeruddin interact with locals of Bachupally residents over absence of worship places
Jun 07, 2026
Latest Urdu News
حیدرآباد: ڈیوٹی پر جانے والی سینئر  خاتون نرس ٹکر میں جاں بحق، ملزمان فرار
پربھنی ہنومان مندر میں المناک حادثہ، زیرِ تعمیر ہال کی چھت گرنے سے 7 ہلاک، 25 زخمی
بغیر ٹکٹ سفر کرنے والوں کے لیے بری خبر، جرمانہ دوگنا
امریکہ اور ایران کے درمیان تاریخی امن معاہدہ، جنگی کشیدگی کے خاتمے کا اعلان
حیدرآباد کے میڑچل میں خوفناک سڑک حادثہ، ایک ہی خاندان کے 3 افراد جاں بحق
نظام آباد کے 2 نوجوانوں پر اشرار کا حملہ
حیدر آبادی پر و فیسر وسیم حنیف کو آرڈر آف برٹش ایمپائر کا باوقار ایوارڈ
عثمانیہ میڈیکل کالج میں ریگنگ کا معاملہ، 12 فائنل ایئر طلبہ کے خلاف مقدمہ درج
ماہِ محرم کا چاند نظر آگیا، مرکزی رویتِ ہلال کمیٹی کا اعلان
میرٹھ کی تاریخی جامع مسجد کو شہید کرنے سرکاری نوٹس
بانی کاکروچ جنتا پارٹی پر حملہ
میں دوسرے بچوں کی طرح کیوں نہیں ہوں؟
غزہ میں اسرائیلی حملے جاری ایک فلسطینی شہید، کئی مکانات تباہ
مہاراشٹرا میں پیش امام پر حملہ، ہندو مذہبی نعرہ لگانے مجبور کیا گیا
مسجد اقصیٰ میں مسلم امہ کی موجودگی ہی دشمنوں کے خلاف پہلی دفاعی لکیر : شیخ عکرمہ صبری
Most Viewed
San Francisco Turns to AI to Safeguard Whales From Ship Strikes
May 21, 2026
'US must respond': Trump admits Iran shot down Apache helicopter over Strait of Hormuz
Jun 10, 2026
Google 'North Korean hackers using AI to find cybersecurity blind spots'
May 12, 2026
Trump gives 'Clock ticking' warning to Iran, says to act fast or nothing will be left of them
May 17, 2026
Trump greets PM Modi on completing 12 years in office, says 'Strong, wise man'
Jun 11, 2026
Woman sets house on fire to frame relatives, dies of burns in UP
May 20, 2026
'Protect seafarers': PM flags sailors' safety at G7 Summit in Trump's presence
Jun 17, 2026
Sajjanar Launches India?s First AI Multilingual Complaint Recorder
May 23, 2026
Iran threatens to open new fronts against US and Israel amid deadlock, claims control over Hormuz
May 20, 2026
Who will win IPL 2026 trophy this season?
Like Us
Etemaad Daily
Home
About Us
Advertise With Us
All Polls
Epaper Archives
Privacy Policy
Contact Us
Download Etemaad App
© 2026 Etemaad Daily News, All Rights Reserved.

ARTICLE 31
TITLE: Fake Coconut Oil Identity: Signs your coconut oil is fake and how to spot the real one
URL: https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/life-style/beauty/signs-your-coconut-oil-is-fake-and-how-to-spot-the-real-one/photostory/124849847.cms

As the price of coconut oil continues to surge in the market, especially in the southern region of India, the rising prices have now become a concern in many households. This has also given space for fake coconut oil production, which is raising serious skin and hair concerns for many. Adulteration of coconut oil involves the addition of cheaper oils available in the market or meagre substances to increase the profit margins, which compromises the overall quality and health benefits. If you wish to know how to spot the real one, then follow these simple tips.
Before applying your coconut oil, start with the visual inspection, in which, if you see a transparent appearance when in liquid form and a white, solid consistency at room temperature, then it is good to go. But if you see any cloudiness, sedimentation, or unnatural colouration, then your coconut oil is impure and is almost fake.
(Image Credits: Pinterest)
Authentic coconut oil carries a unique aroma of fresh coconut. If you feel that the oil smells stale or lacks the coconut fragrance, then it is not a pure one. This is usually not recommended, but if you have bought the coconut oil for consumption, then taste a bit with your finger, and if you feel there is a hint of rancid taste or smell, then it is not pure. Always remember that pure coconut oil usually carries a sweet and nutty flavour.
(Image Credits: Pinterest)
Pure coconut oil solidifies at temperatures below 24°C because of its high saturated fat content. So, you need to simply keep a sample in the refrigerator. If it solidifies within a short period, then it is a pure one. But, even after an hour, if your coconut oil has a liquid texture, then understand that you have a fake one in your hands.
(Image Credits: Pinterest)
Before purchasing, always read the label carefully for any indications of adulteration or misleading claims. Your coconut oil should only have a single ingredient and should come without any additional oils, additives, or fragrance. Look for seals approved by recognised organisations to verify the authenticity. Also, choose from trusted brands that are known for their quality and integrity. You can also look for certifications like non-GMO, fair trade, and organic, which follow ethical practices only.
(Image Credits: Pinterest)
The adulteration of coconut oil not only dilutes the nutritional value of coconut oil but also poses risks by introducing potentially harmful substances. Adulteration cuts the cost of vendors, whereas, to make the purchase look satisfactory and full, many brands include cheaper oils like palm oil and even refined coconut oil, which do not give you the desired result for which you’re actually applying. Many cheaper brands add substances like paraffin wax, synthetic antioxidants, and hydrogenated fats, mimicking the appearance and consistency of pure coconut oil. So, kindly beware of them!
(Image Credits: Pinterest)

ARTICLE 32
TITLE: Police seize 150 containers of stolen edible oil in Balangir; two arrested | Bhubaneswar News - The Times of India
URL: https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/bhubaneswar/police-seize-150-tins-of-stolen-edible-oil-in-balangir-two-arrested/articleshow/125204052.cms

Balangir: A joint team of Deogaon and Kantabanji police intercepted a pickup van near Dumerpita village in Balangir district on Saturday night and seized 150 containers of stolen edible oil. The oil was allegedly stolen from a godown in Chatuanka area of Kantabanji on Thursday.
Godown owner, Mukesh Kumar Jain, had lodged a formal complaint, following which police arrested two individuals, including the alleged mastermind.
The accused were identified as Himansu Putel, 23, and Santosh Punji, 35. Himanshu, a resident of Chatuanka, planned and stole the edible oil stock with the help of three associates. Acting on a tip-off, police chased and intercepted the vehicle near Dumerpita. The confiscated consignment was confirmed to be the oil stock stolen from Jainâs godown.
âThis was a well-coordinated effort that exposed a significant theft ring,â said Gopal Chandra Karan, inspector in-charge of Kantabanji police station. âWe have arrested two persons. Two others involved in the theft are at large,â he added.
Police revealed the seized stock comprises multiple brands and varieties of oil, including both locally manufactured and established brands.
While police investigation continues, the food safety wing has been enlisted to examine the oilâs quality and safety. Officials are verifying legal registrations and compliance with food safety norms, a crucial step to determine if the oil was meant for public distribution.
Further investigation is underway to trace the supply chain. The accused will be produced before a local court soon.

ARTICLE 33
TITLE: Kanpur: Family Tragedy, Adulterated Oil Seized, Policy Announcements &More
URL: https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/videos/ai-top-news/kanpur-family-tragedy-adulterated-oil-seized-policy-announcements-more/videoshow/128817874.cms

Kanpur: Family Tragedy, Adulterated Oil Seized, Policy Announcements &More
1 views | Feb 26, 2026, 08:30:00 PM
Here are the major updates from Kanpur today â covering civic updates, traffic and metro alerts, weather conditions, and key political and administrative developments. Watch the full video to stay informed and ahead.

ARTICLE 34
TITLE: Coconut Oil Purity Test: FSSAI shares simple trick to detect adulteration in the oil you use for hair, skin and food
URL: https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/new-updates/coconut-oil-purity-test-fssai-shares-simple-trick-to-detect-adulteration-in-the-oil-you-use-for-hair-skin-and-food/articleshow/129389742.cms

Read more: 1.5 lakh kg expired Amul-branded food destroyed! How Jaipur firm planned to resell products by changing expiry dates
The caption read: “Check the purity of your coconut oil in minutes with this simple adulteration test. A small step can help ensure the food you consume is safe and authentic. #NoToAdulteration.”
Why It’s Important to Test Coconut Oil
Pure coconut oil has a distinctive texture and solidifies at a particular temperature range. Adulterated coconut oil, mixed with other vegetable or mineral oils, will not behave the same way when chilled. By taking advantage of the different freezing points of oils, you can spot impurities using a simple fridge test.Consumers today are more conscious than ever about food quality. Knowing how to test coconut oil at home can save money, reduce health risks and ensure that you are using authentic products in your kitchen.
Coconut Oil Purity Test: What You Will Need
Before trying this test, gather the following:- A clear, clean container (glass or plastic)
- Your coconut oil (melted if solid)
- A refrigerator that can reach 5–10 °C
- Patience (about 60–90 minutes of cooling time)
Step-by-Step Coconut Oil Adulteration Test
1. Place Coconut Oil in a Container
Spoon or pour a small amount of your coconut oil into a transparent container. A clear view helps you spot changes after cooling. If the oil is solid, gently heat it until it becomes liquid but avoid overheating.2. Chill the Oil Between 5 and 10 °C
Put the container in the refrigerator. The ideal temperature range for this test is 5–10 °C. This is colder than room temperature but warmer than freezing.3. Wait for 60–90 Minutes
Let the oil rest undisturbed for about one to one-and-a-half hours. During this time the oil will begin to solidify.4. Observe the Texture After Cooling
Here is the key: Pure coconut oil will solidify uniformly and its form will remain unchanged.Adulterated coconut oil often forms separate layers or patches after cooling. This happens because oils with different freezing points do not solidify at the same rate or temperature as pure coconut oil.
If you see a distinct layer on top or uneven solidification, it may indicate the presence of other oils.
Tips for Accurate Results
- Make sure the refrigerator temperature is stable. Fluctuating temperatures can affect results.
- Always use a clean container to avoid contamination.
- Test different brands to compare their behaviour under the same conditions.
Be Smart About Food Safety
Simple home tests like the one shared by FSSAI on X give consumers practical tools to check product authenticity. While this method is not a replacement for lab testing, it helps spot obvious adulteration quickly and cheaply. By learning how to test coconut oil for purity, you can enjoy healthier cooking and greater confidence in what you buy. #NoToAdulteration

ARTICLE 35
TITLE: Expired Mustard Oil Seized in Hazaribag Food Safety Raid | Ranchi News - The Times of India
URL: https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/ranchi/expired-mustard-oil-seized-in-hazaribag-food-safety-raid/articleshow/130094279.cms

Hazaribag: Acting on directives of DC Shashi Prakash Singh and additional chief medical officer Dr Shashi Jaiswal, a food safety team conducted a surprise raid at a Barhi-based business firm on Tuesday, uncovering a large stock of expired mustard oil.
Led by food safety officer Md Manjar Hussain, the team collected samples of multiple brands for chemical analysis at the state food testing laboratory in Namkum.
During inspection, officials seized 813 tins and 144 bottles of expired mustard oil. The stock was immediately confiscated and sealed on the spot. Officials also found that the trader was operating without a valid food licence. Jaiswal confirmed the seizure and said legal action would be initiated under provisions of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006.

ARTICLE 36
TITLE: Repeated reuse of cooking oil can trigger serious health risks: Food Safety official
URL: https://morungexpress.com/repeated-reuse-of-cooking-oil-can-trigger-serious-health-risks-food-safety-official

Attendees during the awareness camps on safe and fortified food, repurposing used cooking oil, good manufacturing practices held in Mopungchuket village on April 22. (Photo Courtesy: Food Safety Officer, Mokokchung)
Changki and Mopungchuket villagers sensitised on food safety practices
Mokokchung, April 22 (MExN): Food Safety officials in Mokokchung have cautioned that repeatedly reusing cooking oil can generate harmful chemicals that may lead to serious health problems.
The caution was issued during awareness camps on safe and fortified food, repurposing used cooking oil, good manufacturing practices, and sensitisation of Food Business Operators (FBOs), organised by the Food Safety Mokokchung Zone at Changki village on April 21 and Mopungchuket village on April 22.
Participants included village authorities, representatives of student, youth and women bodies, self-help groups, Anganwadi workers, and Food Business Operators.
Speaking at the programme, Designated Officer, Food Safety, Mokokchung Zone Samuel Zehol highlighted the responsibilities of FBOs, including mandatory possession of Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) registration and licences for their establishments.
He also stressed compliance with hygiene and sanitation standards, along with medical fitness certificates for employees engaged in manufacturing units and fast-food establishments.
Zehol underlined the importance of fortified food in improving nutrition and safeguarding public health.
He further stressed the hazard of reusing cooking oil multiple times which can produce harmful chemicals that may lead to serious health problems.
The issue of unlabelled and misbranded food products being sold in the market was also discussed.
Village authorities were urged to maintain vigilance within their jurisdictions and report complaints relating to food articles to the Designated Officer, Food Safety, Mokokchung Zone, under the office of the Chief Medical Officer, Mokokchung.
During the camps, N Hamche Phom and Maongbenla Jamir demonstrated methods to detect common food adulterants in food items, informed a press release.

ARTICLE 37
TITLE: 25k litres of diesel disguised as edible oil seized by cops
URL: https://www.hindustantimes.com/cities/mumbai-news/25k-litres-of-diesel-disguised-as-edible-oil-seized-by-cops-101779646828663.html

25k litres of diesel disguised as edible oil seized by cops
Police arrested the driver, Dharmendrakumar Shyamlal Patel (37), a resident of Vashi, Navi Mumbai, and seized the tanker worth ₹22 lakh. Seven others, including tanker owner Ritesh Abhay Narayan Singh from Diva, Thane, and associates from Palghar and Surat, have been named in the case.
THANE: In a crackdown on illegal fuel transport amid reports of fuel shortages in parts of Maharashtra, a tanker carrying 25,000 litres of diesel disguised as edible oil was seized late Friday night, near Kharegaon toll naka on the Mumbai-Nashik Highway.
Police arrested the driver, Dharmendrakumar Shyamlal Patel (37), a resident of Vashi, Navi Mumbai, and seized the tanker worth ₹22 lakh. Seven others, including tanker owner Ritesh Abhay Narayan Singh from Diva, Thane, and associates from Palghar and Surat, have been named in the case.
Acting on a tip-off, officials intercepted the tanker near the Mumbra diversion road. The vehicle bore an “Edible Oil” label allegedly to evade suspicion. During inspection, officials found diesel stored across five compartments of the tanker. The driver failed to produce valid permits, invoices or transport documents.
Sachin Gaikwad, senior police inspector of Crime Branch Unit-1, said the accused allegedly sourced the fuel through boats operating in Virar creek before transporting it by road towards Nashik.
“The accused violated mandatory safety norms for petroleum transport, posing a serious threat to public safety,” Gaikwad said.
Police suspect the tanker is part of a larger racket in which diesel is siphoned from vessels at sea, transferred through small boats and later transported across the state in tankers disguised as edible oil carriers.
A case has been registered under provisions of the Essential Commodities Act 1955, the Motor Spirit and High Speed Diesel Order 2005, and the Biodiesel Policy 2021.
Catch every big hit, every wicket with Crickit, a one stop destination for Live Scores, Match Stats, Infographics & much more. Explore now!

ARTICLE 38
TITLE: Food regulator bans blending of mustard oil with other edible oils
URL: https://www.financialexpress.com/market/commodities/food-regulator-bans-blending-of-mustard-oil-with-other-edible-oils/2223586/

The food standard regulator, FSSAI, has banned blending of any kind of edible oil with mustard oil from June 8. Such a ban was earlier imposed from October 1 last year, only to be revoked in less than three months.
As the government has been stressing on ‘Atmanirbhar’ in oilseeds production, a consistent policy may help it achieve this and cut annual edible oil import bill of Rs 75,000 crore, industry sources said.
In a notification issued earlier this month, the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) has inserted a Clause 11 under “sale of certain admixtures prohibited” that says “Any multi source edible vegetable oil containing Mustard Oil manufactured on or after June 8, 2021.” According to the FSSAI regulations, blending of two edible oils is permitted, provided the proportion by weight of any edible vegetable oil used in the blending process is not less than 20%.
Sources in the edible oil industry said blended oils were being “unscrupulously” passed on to unsuspecting consumers as mustard oil. There was a demand even from genuine players in the edible oil industry to stop the practice of blending in mustard oil so that demand is not diluted and farmers are also paid remunerative prices to motivate them for raising production. The size of the mustard oil industry is around Rs 40,000 crore, at current prices and projected output of the oilseed.
According to the second advance estimates released by the agriculture ministry in February, there may be a record production of mustard seen at 10.43 million tonne in 2020-21 crop year (July-June), up by over 14% from the previous year. However, the Central Organization for Oil Industry and Trade (COOIT) has estimated 8.95 million tonne of mustard seed output, up by more than 19% from last year. Official estimates suggested mustard production was 9.12 million tonne, while COOIT pegged it at 7.5 million tonne during 2019-20.
Fortunately for farmers, the mustard prices have been robust this year while 77% of the crop area has been harvested as of March 19.
The sowing was also at record 6.85 million hectare this year, against a five-year average of 5.9 million hectare. The average mandi price of mustard was Rs 5,121/quintal in India’s top producing state Rajasthan during March, up by more than 10% from its MSP of Rs 4,650. The all-India average retail price of mustard oil, too, has increased by around 19% to Rs 152/litre in the past six months, consumer affairs ministry data revealed.
“We have been advocating the ban on blending for quite some time. Mustard oil is one of the healthy edible oils and the ban on blending will encourage more and more people towards mustard oil. The move will also help farmers in getting better price for their produce and help in reducing reliance on imports for meeting our edible oil requirements,” said Suresh Nagpal, chairman of COOIT.
The agriculture ministry had proposed a five-year plan of edible oil mission at an estimated expenditure of Rs 19,000 crore to reduce import of edible oils such as palm and soybean oil. However, no such announcement was made during the FY22 Budget, and there may be a decision around August 15, sources said.

ARTICLE 39
TITLE: Edible oil worth over Rs 8 lakh looted from Purnia godown | Patna News - Times of India
URL: https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/patna/edible-oil-worth-over-rs-8l-looted-from-purnia-godown/articleshow/87855625.cms

PATNA: Forget cash and jewellery. Now edible oil, the prices of which have skyrocketed in the market, is criminalsâ latest target. The criminals entered the godown of a private agency in Purnia and looted edible oil worth over Rs 8.16 lakh in the wee hours of Sunday.
Police said over a dozen criminals wearing masks barged into the godown of Emami Agrotech Private Ltd at Ramraj Chowk under Purnia sadar police station and stolen edible oil stocked for local distribution.
The guard of the godown, Mohammad Alam, was taken hostage by the criminals before being taken to an isolated location. The cartons and packets of edible oil were subsequently loaded in a truck parked on the campus of the godown.
âThe operation continued for about two hours. All the criminals had covered their faces with towel and masks,â the guard told the police.
Incharge of the godown and proprietor of Ritesh Store Farm, Ritesh Gungarwal, lodged a complaint with the sadar police station in connection with the loot. âWe hope police will crack the case soon,â he told reporters in Purnia.
SHO of sadar police station Madhurendra Kumar rushed to the spot and inquired about the incident. SDPO Surendra Kumar Saroj also inquired about the incident and asked the investigating officer to ascertain the identity of the gang.
The police have obtained CCTV footage from nearby houses and business establishments at Gulabbagh in the heart of the divisional town. âThe soaring prices of edible oil may have attracted the criminals to loot the essential commodity,â an investigating officer said.
Earlier, trucks carrying garlic and onion were hijacked by criminals on NH-02 in Kaimur and Rohtas districts. Though FIRs were lodged by the victims, nothing happened in the two cases.

ARTICLE 40
TITLE: Sebi bans launch of new derivative contracts of crude palm oil, few other agri commodities
URL: https://www.financialexpress.com/market/commodities/sebi-bans-launch-of-new-derivative-contracts-of-crude-palm-oil-few-other-agri-commodities/2384767/

Markets watchdog Sebi has banned the launch of new derivative contracts of crude palm oil, moong, wheat and few other agricultural commodities with immediate effect amid rising inflation.
With respect to running contracts, no new position will be allowed to be taken and only squaring up of positions will be allowed. The directions will be applicable for one year, Sebi said in a release on Monday.
Launch of new contracts of paddy (non-basmati), wheat, soyabean and its derivatives (its complex), crude palm oil and moong have been barred till further orders.
The list includes chana, and mustard seeds and its derivatives (its complex). The derivative contracts for these commodities were suspended earlier this year.
Deepak Jasani, Head of Retail Research at HDFC Securities, said banning derivatives for seven agricultural commodities for one year seems to be a knee jerk reaction to the unrelenting inflation pressure from food items.
National Commodity and Derivatives Exchange Ltd (NCDEX) said no fresh positions, including intra-day, will be allowed in respect of futures and options contracts of certain commodities and only squaring up of existing positions will be allowed.
“No new futures and options contracts will be launched till further notice in any of the commodities listed…,” NCDEX said in a circular.
The commodities listed are wheat, chana, rapeseed – mustard seed, soybean, refined soy oil, hipro soybean meal, crude palm oil, moong and NCDEX Soydex.
In a circular, commodity bourse MCX said no fresh position, including intra-day, will be allowed in respect of futures contract of crude palm oil on the exchange from Monday.
Only squaring up of existing position will be allowed and no new futures contract of crude palm oil will be launched till further notice, it added.
National Stock Exchange (NSE), in a circular, said all the existing contracts of Crude Degummed Soybean Oil Futures (DEGUMSYOIL) have been suspended for trading with immediate effect and that no new futures contracts shall be launched till further orders.
“While some correction in prices of these commodities may be expected in the near term, sustained fall in the prices of these will happen when the supply of these commodities rises due to better crop or imports.
“Inflation may dip marginally in the near term but may then depend on whether these prices have again risen or have sustained at lower levels,” Jasani noted.
In November, retail inflation rose to a three-month high of 4.91 per cent, mainly due to an uptick in food prices. During the same month, the wholesale price-based inflation surged to a record high of 14.23 per cent amid hardening of prices of mineral oils, basic metals, crude petroleum and natural gas.
Solvent Extractors Association of India (SEA) Executive Director B V Mehta said the government was compelled to suspend futures tradings in some farm commodities because of the high prices of cooking oils in the domestic market.
“We feel that the futures trading is also important for price discovery. We request the government to revisit the issue during February, when mustard crops starts arriving in the market, to ensure that farmers get right prices for their produce and market rates do not fall below the minimum support price (MSP),” he added.
SEA is one of the leading industry bodies for edible oil processors.
Origo Commodities Vice President K V Singh said the decision to ban derivatives in seven commodities is a “highly regressive step by the central government”.
“It will have a very negative impact on the health of the agri commodities derivatives markets in India and the confidence of the market participants,” he added.

ARTICLE 41
TITLE: Sebi bans launch of new derivative contracts of crude palm oil
URL: https://www.theweek.in/news/biz-tech/2021/12/20/sebi-bans-launch-of-new-derivative-contracts-of-crude-palm-oil.html

Markets watchdog Sebi has banned the launch of new derivative contracts of crude palm oil, moong, wheat and few other agricultural commodities with immediate effect amid rising inflation.
With respect to running contracts, no new position will be allowed to be taken and only squaring up of positions will be allowed. The directions will be applicable for one year, Sebi said in a release on Monday.
Launch of new contracts of paddy (non-basmati), wheat, soybean and its derivatives, crude palm oil and moong have been barred till further orders.
The list includes chana, and mustard seeds and its derivatives (its complex). The derivative contracts for these commodities were suspended earlier this year.
Deepak Jasani, Head of Retail Research at HDFC Securities, said banning derivatives for seven agricultural commodities for one year seems to be a knee jerk reaction to the unrelenting inflation pressure from food items.
National Commodity and Derivatives Exchange Ltd (NCDEX) said no fresh positions, including intra-day, will be allowed in respect of futures and options contracts of certain commodities and only squaring up of existing positions will be allowed.
"No new futures and options contracts will be launched till further notice in any of the commodities listed...," NCDEX said in a circular.
The commodities listed are wheat, chana, rapeseed - mustard seed, soybean, refined soy oil, hipro soybean meal, crude palm oil, moong and NCDEX Soydex.
In a circular, commodity bourse MCX said no fresh position, including intra-day, will be allowed in respect of futures contract of crude palm oil on the exchange from Monday.
Only squaring up of existing position will be allowed and no new futures contract of crude palm oil will be launched till further notice, it added.
National Stock Exchange (NSE), in a circular, said all the existing contracts of Crude Degummed Soybean Oil Futures (DEGUMSYOIL) have been suspended for trading with immediate effect and that no new futures contracts shall be launched till further orders.
"While some correction in prices of these commodities may be expected in the near term, sustained fall in the prices of these will happen when the supply of these commodities rises due to better crop or imports.
"Inflation may dip marginally in the near term but may then depend on whether these prices have again risen or have sustained at lower levels," Jasani noted.
In November, retail inflation rose to a three-month high of 4.91 per cent, mainly due to an uptick in food prices. During the same month, the wholesale price-based inflation surged to a record high of 14.23 per cent amid hardening of prices of mineral oils, basic metals, crude petroleum and natural gas.
Solvent Extractors Association of India (SEA) Executive Director B V Mehta said the government was compelled to suspend futures tradings in some farm commodities because of the high prices of cooking oils in the domestic market.
 "We feel that the futures trading is also important for price discovery. We request the government to revisit the issue during February, when mustard crops starts arriving in the market, to ensure that farmers get right prices for their produce and market rates do not fall below the minimum support price (MSP)," he added.
SEA is one of the leading industry bodies for edible oil processors.
Origo Commodities Vice President K V Singh said the decision to ban derivatives in seven commodities is a "highly regressive step by the central government".
"It will have a very negative impact on the health of the agri commodities derivatives markets in India and the confidence of the market participants," he added.

ARTICLE 42
TITLE: Sunflower oil shortage boon for palm oil producers, bane for consumers
URL: https://www.siasat.com/sunflower-oil-shortage-boon-for-palm-oil-producers-bane-for-consumers-2290324/

New Delhi: Shortage of sunflower oil amid the ongoing Russia-Ukraine war has sent crude palm oil prices through the roof.
The geo-political worries in the Black Sea region has a significant bearing on sunflower seed and its oil supply from the region, as both countries involved in the war are major sources for the oilseed.
India is a major importer of crude palm oil, as the country meets more than two-third of its edible oil needs through imports, of which palm oil accounts for more than 60 per cent.
India imports more than 2.5 million tonnes of sunflower oil, including from Russia and Ukraine.
In reaction to possible supply disruption of sunflower oil, palm oil prices rallied sharply as all the edible oils track each other’s prices as they compete in the market for price realisation, and any potential supply disruption for one variant buoys the prices of others.
“The war between Ukraine and Russia shook the major supply of sunflower oil, thereby disrupting the demand and supply of the entire global edible oil (market). India is one of the largest importers of sunflower oil, importing more than 2.5 million tonnes. Dependence on sunflower oil from other large producers like Europe and Argentina seems to be very low as both these countries are largest domestic consumers,” said Vinod T.P., Research Analyst at Geojit Financial Services.
“With regard to Argentina, due to higher prices, lower output and higher shipment cost, the move for importing sunflower oil fromm there is likely to be on the lower side. As India is diverse in culture and eating habits, people will mostly switch over to other edible oils which are available at a cheaper rate.”
Vinod expects the dependence on soybean oil and palm oil to rise.
“Expectation of higher mustard production is likely to cushion some prices (of edible oils) in the near term,” he said.
Rabi mustard is currently being harvested, and it will make its way into the markets in the next few days. Freshly harvested mustard pouring into the mandis will, to an extent, check the rising edible oil prices.
Taking cues from sunflower shortage and rally in crude palm oil prices, the global benchmark soybean oil prices have risen more than 10 per cent since the start of the war.
Constantly falling soybean crop estimates from South American countries and Indonesia raising domestic allocation of palm oil consumption are likely to support crude palm oil prices, said brokerage house Kotak Securities.
Reportedly, the Indonesian government recently mandated a minimum proportion of production to be sold locally in a bid to curtail a dramatic rise in domestic cooking oil prices. Indonesia is the largest producer of oil palm, followed by Malaysia.
Despite several attempts made by the Centre to cool off edible oil prices, nothing much has happened.
In mid-2021, the Centre removed import restrictions on refined bleached deodorised palm oil, refined bleached deodorised palmolein, and another variant (palm oil and its fractions, whether or not refined, but not chemically modified) till December 31, 2021, which have now now been extended till the end of 2022.
Besides, in late 2021, the Centre reduced the basic Customs duty on refined palm oil from 17.5 per cent to 12.5 per cent till March 2022.
Dorab E. Mistry, Director of Godrej International, said recently at an event that the high energy prices may prolong because of which 2022 may be a year of stagflation.
World economic slowdown is expected to weigh on commodity prices, including palm oil, Mistry said.
Further, stagflation may lead to recession. As a result, in the second half of 2022, a dramatic fall in commodity prices, including those of energy, are likely as demand may fall sharply, he said.

ARTICLE 43
TITLE: Palm oil ban: Edible oil industry asks govt to initiate dialogue with Indonesia - BusinessToday
URL: https://www.businesstoday.in/industry/story/palm-oil-ban-edible-oil-industry-asks-govt-to-initiate-dialogue-with-indonesia-331104-2022-04-25

The cooking oil national industry body -- Solvent Extractors' Association (SEA) of India has suggested immediate initiation of government to government (G2G) dialogue with Indonesia on the proposed palm oil export ban from April 28 by them as it would have an adverse repercussions in India.
Indonesia, which is the world's largest producer of palm oil and meets nearly 50 per cent of the total palm oil requirement in India annually, had announced to ban exports till further notice apparently to contain edible oil prices in their domestic market.
''We have suggested our government initiate dialogue with Indonesian counterparts at the highest diplomatic level on the cooking oil export ban. This will have serious repercussions in our domestic market as half of our total imports of palm oil is from Indonesia and no one can fill up this void,'' SEA director general B V Mehta told PTI.
SEA liaisons with the Union Food ministry, he said.
Mehta said, ''... the industry was not expecting a ban. There will be an immediate impact on prices in the domestic market from Monday itself as the news of the ban has distorted the sentiment.'' The cooking oil industry was prepared for a tweak in export duty at worst by Indonesia which is grappling with its cooking oil price spike in their domestic market by about 40-50 per cent. Indonesia was levying USD 575 per tonne export duty.
''The news will push Malaysia oil prices higher which is our major alternate sourcing market,'' Mehta said. ''India consumes 22.5 million tonne of edible oil annually of which 9-9.5 million tonne is met by domestic supplies and the rest by imports. About 3.5-4 million tonne of palm oil is imported by India annually from Indonesia,'' he said.
With the Ukraine war, the sunflower and soybean oil is already under pressure as imports have halved but the situation was managed with other variants of oils. But, the Indonesian oil ban will have a ''devastating effect'' unless sorted out quickly, an edible oil refiner official said.
The last Indian Economic Survey had blamed rising price of oil and fats and it was a major driver of inflation in the foods and beverages category in the fiscal FY'22 Oil and fats contributed to around 60 per cent of food and beverages inflation in the country, despite having a weight of only 7.8 per cent in the basket.
Inflation both at the retail and wholesale levels for edible oil had begun in Q4FY19-20 and still continues. The Wholesale Price Index or WPI -based inflation already surged to 14.55 per cent in March 2022, after a 13.11 per cent reading in February 2022.
Edible oils such as palm oil are a key raw material for FMCG and HoReCa (hotels, restaurants and caterers) industries and a rise in the prices of these commodities impacts consumer goods beyond food products such as soaps, shampoos, etc.

ARTICLE 44
TITLE: Centre imposes strict stock limit on edible oil, oilseeds to arrest price rise
URL: https://indianexpress.com/article/cities/pune/centre-imposes-strict-stock-limit-on-edible-oil-oilseeds-to-arrest-price-rise-7845831/

Centre imposes strict stock limit on edible oil, oilseeds to arrest price rise
Processors can store only 90 days' worth of storage/production capacity while retailers can hold up to 30 quintals and wholesalers can store up to 500 quintals of edible oil.
In another move to control the soaring edible oil prices, the central government has imposed a strict stock limit on edible oil and oilseeds till December 31, 2022. Now, processors can store only 90 days’ worth of storage/production capacity while retailers can hold up to 30 quintals and wholesalers can store up to 500 quintals of edible oil.
Other than wholesalers and retailers, the government has also turned its eye to bulk retailers (big chain retail shops) who have been allowed to store up to 30 quintals in their outlets and up to 1,000 quintals in their depots respectively. As for oil seeds, retail traders can stock up to 100 quintals while wholesalers can store up to 2,000 quintals. Processors can store up to 90 days’ worth of production as per daily production capacity
This move comes as the price of edible oils continues to pinch the consumers’ pocket. Data from Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution shows that at present mustard oil is retailing at Rs 188.46/litre on March 30, as compared to Rs 148.33/litre last year on the same day. Similarly, groundnut oil (Rs 182.5/Rs 166.71), soybean oil (Rs 162.9/Rs 132.82) and sunflower oil (Rs 184/Rs 159) have also seen an increase in their prices. Palm oil, the cheapest of all edible oils, is at present retailing at Rs 151.14 as compared to Rs 123.14 last year. India imports more than 60 per cent of its annual domestic requirement and thus the present crisis has more to do with international price rise than domestic factors.
The exponential rise in crude price and the war in Ukraine are attributed as reasons for the present uptick in edible oil prices. Most industry leaders ruled out any immediate reduction in prices but talked about softening in the long term. In the case of palm oil, Indonesia, the largest producer and importer, has dictated that 30 per cent of the produce has to be sold at subsidised rates within the country which has affected the landing price in India. Stock limit imposition, many feel, will not have a major impact on the prices immediately.

ARTICLE 45
TITLE: Soyoil futures surge as Indonesia bans palm oil exports to increase supply
URL: https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/international/us/soyoil-futures-surge-as-indoinesia-bans-palm-oil-exports-to-increase-supply/articleshow/91011661.cms

As soon as Indonesia announced the ban, there was a more than 3% jump in the U.S soyoil futures to 84.03 cents/pound.
Atul Chaturvedi, trade body Solvent Extractors Association of India (SEA) President, stated that the move is unfortunate and unexpected and will hurt India and consumers globally. India is the biggest buyer of the most consumed oil globally (palm).
Prices of crude palm oil globally have increased drastically, and this oil is used as cooking oil in Indonesia. The demand is high, and the supply is low from producers in Malaysia and Indonesia, the top producers. It is also a result of a move by Indonesia in January, which restricted the export of palm oil before lifting it in March.
The edible oil markets worldwide have been affected by the Russia-Ukraine war as sunflower oil shipments have been cut off from the region. While Russia is calling this a "special operation." Since the Russian forces invaded Ukraine, shipping has been affected severely. 76% of the world's sunoil export takes place through the Black Sea and commercial shipping.
(Catch all the US News, UK News, Canada News, International Breaking News Events, and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)
Download The Economic Times News App to get Daily International News Updates.
(Catch all the US News, UK News, Canada News, International Breaking News Events, and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)
Download The Economic Times News App to get Daily International News Updates.

ARTICLE 46
TITLE: Indonesia to ban palm oil exports to curb domestic prices - BusinessToday
URL: https://www.businesstoday.in/latest/world/story/indonesia-to-ban-palm-oil-exports-to-curb-domestic-prices-330909-2022-04-22

Indonesia will effectively ban palm oil exports from April 28, until further notice, after President Joko Widodo on Friday announced a halting of shipments of cooking oil and its raw material to control soaring domestic prices.
In a video broadcast, Jokowi, as the president is popularly known, said the policy aimed to ensure availability of food products at home.
"I will monitor and evaluate the implementation of this policy so availability of cooking oil in the domestic market becomes abundant and affordable," he said.
U.S. soyoil futures jumped more than 3% to a record high of 84.03 cents per pound after Indonesia announced the ban.
The move will hurt consumers not only in biggest buyer India but globally, as palm is the world's most consumed oil, Atul Chaturvedi, president of trade body the Solvent Extractors Association of India (SEA), told Reuters.
"This move is rather unfortunate and totally unexpected," he said.
Global prices of crude palm oil, which Indonesia uses for cooking oil, have surged to historic highs this year amid rising demand and weak output from top producers Indonesia and Malaysia, plus a previous move by Indonesia to restrict palm oil exports in January that was later lifted in March.
Meanwhile, global edible oil markets have also been roiled this year by Russia's Ukraine invasion, which cut off shipments of sunflower oil from the region. Russian calls its action a "special operation".
The Black Sea accounts for 76% of world sunoil exports and commercial shipping from the region has been severely affected since Russian forces entered Ukraine in February.
'SKY'S THE LIMIT'
"Sky would be limit for edible oil prices now. Buyers were banking on palm oil after sunoil supplies fell because of the Ukraine war," a Mumbai-based dealer at a global trading firm said.
"Now they (buyers) don't have any option as soyoil supplies are also limited."
Indonesia counts for more than half of global palm oil supply.
Indonesia has since 2018 stopped the issuance of new permits for palm oil plantations, often blamed for deforestation and destroying habitats of endangered animals such as orangutan.
Palm oil industry association GAPKI said it would adhere to the policy but asked for government re-evaluation of the ban should it hurt the sector.
"If this policy has any negative impact on the sustainability of the palm oil sector, we would ask the government to re-evaluate the policy," it said in a statement.
In Indonesia, the retail price of cooking oil averages out at 26,436 rupiah ($1.84) per litre, up more than 40% so far this year. In some provinces across the country, the prices have nearly doubled in the past month alone, according to a price monitoring page.
Demonstrations by students have taken place in several cities across Indonesia in recent days over high cooking oil prices.
Indonesia's government has set a cap of 14,000 rupiah per litre for bulk cooking oil, but Trade Ministry data showed that it was sold at more than 18,000 rupiah this month.
A government investigation is underway into alleged corruption in the issue of sought-after export permits.
($1 = 14,356.0000 rupiah)

ARTICLE 47
TITLE: Indonesia bans palm oil export, world to face the jitters  | World News | Zee News
URL: https://zeenews.india.com/world/indonesia-bans-palm-oil-export-world-to-face-the-jitters-2456405.html

Indonesia has decided to ban the export of palm oil from April 28, the country’s President Joko Widodo announced on Friday. Widodo said the decision has been taken to control skyrocketing domestic prices and ensure availability of food products at home. “I will monitor and evaluate the implementation of this policy so availability of cooking oil in the domestic market becomes abundant and affordable,” he said in a video address.
Indonesia is the world’s biggest exporter of palm oil. On February 21, we had reported how one litre of palm oil was selling for up to Rs 22,000 Indonesian rupiah! The country introduced restrictions on palm oil exports in late January, but lifted them in March – a move that sent global prices to historic highs.
India has been adversely affected by increasing prices of palm oil as well, for it is one of the biggest importers of vegetable oil. India imports nearly 60 per cent of its edible oil, and palm oil comprises 60 per cent of this demand. Indonesia supplies around half of our palm oil requirements and the crisis in this Southeast Asian country has upped edible oil prices in India by 20-25 per cent already – with the ban expected to push up prices further.
Till a few years back, Indonesia alone supplied close to 65 per cent of India’s palm oil demands. Since last year, however, Malaysia partially surpassed it, after Indonesia imposed heavy taxes on palm oil exports. In March 2022, India imported a total of 10,51,698 tonnes of edible oil against 9,57,633 tonnes in March 2021 – a rise of nearly 10 per cent.
The decision to ban palm oil export by Indonesia has triggered price shockwaves across the globe, and prices of soya, refined and sunflower oil are expected to soar soon. According to the Chicago Board of Trade, soya oil prices have already spiked by 4 per cent.
Indonesia is the second Asian country after Sri Lanka to reel under severe inflation. The biggest reason for the sky-rocketing price of palm oil is the Russia-Ukraine war. Both countries are said to be the biggest producers of sunflower and soyabean oil and together produce 80 per cent of the global demand. But with supply stopped since the start of the war on February 24, the world has turned towards the closest substitute, i.e. palm oil. And this has increased the global demand for palm oil, leading to more exports than usual for Indonesia.
On the other hand, when Indonesian authorities tried to control prices of palm oil, it led to increased hoarding. The government had fixed the price of branded oil to 14,000 Indonesian rupiah and that of crude palm oil to 9,300 Indonesian rupiah. At the same time, one person was allowed to but only 2 litres of palm oil at once and exporters were instructed to sell 30 per cent of the produce in the domestic market. But traders opposed the move, and thus began increased hoarding. (With agency inputs)
Stay informed on all the latest news, real-time breaking news updates, and follow all the important headlines in india news and world news on Zee News.

ARTICLE 48
TITLE: Indonesia to ban palm oil exports to curb domestic prices
URL: https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/international/business/indonesia-to-ban-palm-oil-exports-to-curb-domestic-prices/articleshow/91013410.cms

The measure could further inflame global food inflation that soared to a record high following Russia's invasion of Ukraine, raise costs for packaged food producers and force governments to choose between using vegetable oils in food or for biofuel.
In a video broadcast, Jokowi, as the president is popularly known, said the policy aimed to ensure availability of food products at home in the world's top palm oil producer and exporter.
"I will monitor and evaluate the implementation of this policy so availability of cooking oil in the domestic market becomes abundant and affordable," he said.
Soybean oil prices on the Chicago Board of Trade rose 4.5% to a record high of 83.21 cents per pound.
oil exports in January that was later lifted in March.
Household product and food companies including Procter & Gamble Co, Nestle SA and Unilever PLC are large purchasers of palm oil. Oreo cookie maker Mondelez International Inc accounts for .5% of palm oil consumption globally, according to its website.
Meanwhile, global edible oil markets have also been roiled this year by Russia's Ukraine invasion, which cut off shipments of sunflower oil from the region. Russian calls its action a "special operation". Ukraine and its Western allies call it an unprovoked attack.
The Black Sea accounts for 76% of world sunoil exports and commercial shipping from the region has been severely affected since Russian forces entered Ukraine in February.
Large supplies of alternatives including soy and rapeseed oil are not readily available either.
Argentina, the world's top exporter of processed soy, briefly halted new overseas sales of soy oil and meal in mid-March before hiking the export tax rate on soy oil and meal to 33% from 31% in a bid to tamp down domestic food inflation. Drought curbed its soybean harvest, limiting supplies.
New facilities for processing soy and canola oil are expected to open in the United States and Canada respectively in coming years, but ramping up production in the near term will be difficult.
'SKY'S THE LIMIT'
"Sky would be limit for edible oil prices now. Buyers were banking on palm oil after sunoil supplies fell because of the Ukraine war," a Mumbai-based dealer at a global trading firm said.
"Now they (buyers) don't have any option as soyoil supplies are also limited."
Indonesia counts for more than half of global palm oil supply. Malaysian producers say the world’s second largest palm oil exporter, which is facing a production shortfall due to a pandemic-induced labour shortage, is unlikely to be able to plug the supply gap left by Indonesia.
Indonesia has since 2018 stopped the issuance of new permits for palm oil plantations, often blamed for deforestation and destroying habitats of endangered animals such as orangutans.
Palm oil industry association GAPKI said it would adhere to the policy but asked for government re-evaluation of the ban should it hurt the sector.
"If this policy has any negative impact on the sustainability of the palm oil sector, we would ask the government to re-evaluate the policy," it said in a statement.
In Indonesia, the retail price of cooking oil averages 26,436 rupiah ($1.84) per litre, up more than 40% so far this year. In some provinces across the country, the prices have nearly doubled in the past month alone, according to a price monitoring page.
Demonstrations by students have taken place in several cities across Indonesia in recent days over high cooking oil prices.
Indonesia's government has set a cap of 14,000 rupiah per litre for bulk cooking oil, but Trade Ministry data showed that it was sold at more than 18,000 rupiah this month.
A government investigation is underway into alleged corruption in the issue of sought-after export permits. ($1 = 14,356.0000 rupiah)

ARTICLE 49
TITLE: Indonesia bans palm oil exports as global food inflation spikes
URL: https://indianexpress.com/article/world/indonesia-bans-palm-oil-exports-global-food-inflation-spikes-7883388/

Indonesia, the world’s top palm oil producer, announced plans to ban exports of the most widely used vegetable oil on Friday, in a shock move that could further inflame surging global food inflation.The halting of shipments of the cooking oil and its raw material, widely used in products ranging from cakes to cosmetics, could raise costs for packaged food producers globally and force governments to choose between using vegetable oils in food or for biofuel.
Indonesia counts for more than half of global palm oil supply.In a video broadcast, Indonesia’s President Joko Widodo said he wanted to ensure the availability of food products at home, after global food inflation soared to a record high following Russia’s invasion of major crop producer Ukraine.
“I will monitor and evaluate the implementation of this policy so availability of cooking oil in the domestic market becomes abundant and affordable,” he said.The announcement will hurt consumers in top buyer India and. globally, said, Atul Chaturvedi, president of trade body the Solvent Extractors Association of India (SEA).”This move is rather unfortunate and totally unexpected,” he said.
Alternative vegetable oil prices spiked in response to the measure which will take effect on April 28. Soybean oil, the second most used vegetable oil, rose 4.5% to a record high of 83.21 cents per pound on the Chicago Board of Trade.Global prices of crude palm oil, which Indonesia uses for cooking oil, have surged to historic highs this year amid rising demand and weak output from top producers Indonesia and Malaysia, plus a move by Indonesia to restrict palm oil exports in January that was lifted in March.
Household product and food companies including Procter & Gamble Co, Nestle SA and Unilever PLC are large purchasers of palm oil. Oreo cookie maker Mondelez International Inc accounts for 0.5% of palm oil consumption globally, according to its website.Other countries have experimented with crop protectionism to try to keep domestic prices down.
Argentina, the world’s top exporter of processed soy, briefly halted new overseas sales of soy oil and meal in mid-March before hiking the export tax rate on those products to 33% from 31%.The U.S. Department of Agriculture urged international cooperation during the war in Ukraine, rather than export bans.Global edible oil markets have been roiled this year by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, a move Russia calls a “special operation” to demilitarise its neighbour, which cut off shipments of sunflower oil from the region.
The Black Sea accounts for 76% of world sunoil exports and commercial shipping from the region has been severely affected since Russian forces entered Ukraine in February.
Large supplies of alternatives including soy and rapeseed oil are not readily available either, after droughts hurt the most recent crops in Argentina, Brazil and Canada.
New facilities for processing soy and canola oil are expected to open in the United States and Canada respectively in coming years, as demand for plant-based biofuels grows, but ramping up production in the near term will be difficult.
Industry group the Clean Fuels Alliance America said the move could hurt biofuel producers, even though US biodiesel and renewable diesel producers don’t use palm oil, as supplies of all oils are tight.’SKY’S THE LIMIT'”Sky would be the limit for edible oil prices now. Buyers were banking on palm oil after sunoil supplies fell because of
the Ukraine war,” a Mumbai-based dealer at a global trading firm said.
“Now they (buyers) don’t have any option as soyoil supplies are also limited.”Malaysian producers say the world’s No. 2 palm oil exporter, which is facing a production shortfall due to a pandemic-induced labour shortage, is unlikely to be able to plug the gap.Indonesia has since 2018 stopped the issuance of new permits for palm oil plantations, often blamed for deforestation and destroying habitats of endangered animals such as orangutans.
Palm oil industry association GAPKI said it would adhere to the policy but had reservations.”If this policy has any negative impact on the sustainability of the palm oil sector, we would ask the government to re-evaluate the policy,” it said in a statement.In Indonesia, the retail price of cooking oil averages 26,436 rupiah ($1.84) per litre, up more than 40% so far this year. In some provinces across the country, the prices have nearly doubled in the past month alone, according to a price monitoring page.
Demonstrations by students have taken place in several cities across Indonesia in recent days over high cooking oil prices.Indonesia’s government has set a cap of 14,000 rupiah per litre for bulk cooking oil, but Trade Ministry data showed that it was sold at more than 18,000 rupiah this month.A government investigation is underway into alleged corruption involving sought-after export permits.

ARTICLE 50
TITLE: Cooking Oil Prices May Increase In India Amid Indonesia's Palm Oil Export Ban
URL: https://www.india.com/business/cooking-oil-prices-india-may-increase-indonesia-palm-oil-export-ban-5354193/

New Delhi: Cooking oil prices may increase further in India with Indonesia banning exports of edible oil and its raw materials from April 28 (Thursday) to reduce domestic shortages and hold down skyrocketing prices. Indonesia President Joko Widodo had announced the export of palm oil, a day after hundreds of people protested in the capital against rising food costs.
Indonesia and Malaysia are the world’s largest exporters of palm oil, which plays an important role in their economies. They account for 85 per cent of global palm oil production. Indonesia alone accounts for over half of world’s supply of palm oil, which is used in almost everything including processed foods, cosmetics and biofuels.
In an announcement, President Widodo said the ban begins next Thursday and will continue for an undetermined length of time. “I will continue to monitor and evaluate the implementation of this policy so that the availability of cooking oil in the country is abundant and at an affordable price,” Widodo said.
The announcement came three days after the Attorney General’s Office announced a corruption investigation involving a senior Trade Ministry official and three palm oil executives.
Attorney General Sanitiar Burhanuddin said the ministry official is suspected of issuing export permits for crude palm oil and its derivative products that resulted in domestic shortages and sharply higher prices for cooking oil.
The government issued a policy earlier this year obligating all palm oil exporters to ensure that adequate supplies are available in the domestic market and that costs do not follow sharply rising international prices.

ARTICLE 51
TITLE: Edible oil prices in India to surge as Indonesia to ban palm oil exports | Today News
URL: https://www.livemint.com/news/india/edible-oil-prices-in-india-to-surge-as-indonesia-to-halt-palm-oil-exports-11650684747240.html

Edible oil prices in India to surge as Indonesia to ban palm oil exports from 28 April
Global cooking oil prices have surged this year following Russia's invasion of Ukraine, which hit shipments of sunflower oil from the region. The Black Sea accounts for 76% of world sunflower oil exports.
NEW DELHI: Domestic edible oil prices, already high, are set for a surge as Indonesia, the world's largest producer of palm oil, will ban exports from 28 April.
Indonesia, too, has been battling high edible oil prices amid domestic shortages and soaring prices
China and India are among the biggest importers of palm oil from Indonesia, which accounts for more than half the world's supply. Palm oil is used in products from cooking oils to processed foods, cosmetics and biofuels. It is the world's most widely used vegetable oil and is used in the manufacture of many products including biscuits, margarine, laundry detergents and chocolate.
Global cooking oil prices have surged this year following Russia's invasion of Ukraine, which hit shipments of sunflower oil from the region.
The Black Sea accounts for 76% of world sunflower oil exports.
A halt in supplies from Indonesia would mean a loss of about 4 million tonne of palm oil every month for India. Experts said that India’s sunflower oil supplies had halved to nearly 100,000 tonnes per month following the Ukraine war and this could make things worse for households.
Meanwhile, India's wholesale inflation, which has remained in double digits for a year now, quickened to a four-month high in March amid a relentless rise in commodity prices following the Russian invasion of Ukraine.
The Wholesale Price Index (WPI) rose 14.55% in March from 13.11% in February.
Earlier this year, Prime Minister Narendra Modi had urged Indian companies to curb import and begin buying oilseeds produced in the country.

ARTICLE 52
TITLE: Indonesia palm oil export ban to hit packaged goods cos | Mint
URL: https://www.livemint.com/industry/retail/indonesia-palm-oil-export-ban-to-hit-packaged-goods-cos-11650819008169.html

Indonesia’s abrupt export ban on palm oil could disrupt supplies and drive up prices, impacting packaged consumer goods firms and consumers alike. On Friday, Indonesia announced an export ban on palm oil with effect from 28 April. The country is the world’s top palm oil producer.
India imports about 8 million tonnes of palm oil annually; the commodity accounts for nearly 40% share in India’s overall edible oil consumption basket. Palm oil and its derivatives are used in producing several goods of daily consumption such as soaps, shampoos, biscuits, and noodles.
Companies and industry associations flagged near-term pressure on both supplies and prices of products, including packaged foods and edible oils.
“While there are a lot of unknowns, including the duration of the ban, input (on palm oil and its derivative) prices are likely to stay firm in the near term, with a potential risk to supplies as well. The unorganized sector may face severe constraint but given the tough demand environment, listed players face earning risks on demand and margins—Hindustan Unilever Ltd (HUL), Godrej Consumer Products Ltd (GCPL), and packaged foods have the highest exposure,” analysts at Jefferies said in a note on Sunday.
Indian consumer staples have seen high inflation and volatility in input prices. “This development would exacerbate pressures and become a key worry for HUL, GCPL, Britannia, Nestle,” the analysts said.
Parle Products Pvt. Ltd, India’s largest biscuit maker, said the move poses a big challenge for firms across the packaged consumer goods industry. “That’s not just for the food companies, but for FMCG companies at large because there are many other players beyond food firms. including those who manufacture soaps and other things. So, it’s going to be very challenging. Malaysia, the second biggest palm oil exporter, is facing a production shortfall due to a pandemic-induced labour shortage, and is unlikely to be able to plug the gap. So, the expectation was that Indonesian supplies would take care of it, but this is going to be very difficult. There are already issues with sunflower oil, because of the Ukraine-Russia situation. This is going to add to the challenges,” said Mayank Shah, senior category head at Parle Products.
In the last 12 months, palm oil prices have gone up by 50%; and nearly tripled over the last two years. Meanwhile, sunflower oil supplies and prices have remained volatile amid the Ukraine war.
On Saturday, Mint reported that domestic edible oil prices are set for a surge amid Indonesia’s move to ban exports.
Shah said the firm will have to figure out the real impact on prices and how it will mitigate the situation. It has concluded a round of price hikes across its portfolio. On future price hikes, he said it will wait and watch.
Firms have taken a spate of price increases over the last several quarters to tide over volatile commodity prices. Key raw and packaging material prices are witnessing multi-year highs. “There will be an impact and pressure on prices for end consumers. There is clearly a demand-supply gap, this will impact prices,” said B.V. Mehta, executive director at The Solvent Extractors’ Association of India.

ARTICLE 53
TITLE: India’s edible oil prices may rise due to Indonesia’s export ban on palm oil
URL: https://www.siasat.com/indias-edible-oil-prices-may-rise-due-to-indonesias-export-ban-on-palm-oil-2314604/

New Delhi: The already high prices for edible oil since the Ukraine-Russia war broke out will get an added fuel as Indonesia — world’s largest producer and supplier of palm oil — has announced a ban on its export from April 28.
India imports roughly 80 lakh tonnes of palm oil from Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand annually. Of the approximate six lakh tonnes per month import, almost three lakh tonnes come from Indonesia, according to Solvent Extractors’ Association (SEA).
Although the export ban will be effective five days later, it has already created a buzz in the Indian market with traders wary of the impending shortfall and price hike. “This (decision) has come as a fuel in the fire. We already had a worrying situation due to the Ukraine-Russia war and now this. The gap is too wide to bridge,” said Solvent Extractors’ Association (SEA) executive director B.V. Mehta.
Stating that Indonesia already has half a million tonnes storage with four lakh tonnes coming in each month, Mehta said: “It will be hard for them (Indonesia) to continue this for long. I am sure they will open up soon.”
Echoed Suresh Nagpal, chairperson of the Central Organisation for Oil Industry & Trade (COOIT): “Indonesia supplies almost 60-70 per cent of the world’s palm oil. There is some supply chain disruption in their country and hence this is a panic decision by that government. I am sure; they would reverse the decision in about 10-15 days.”
Even when there is no trade on the commodities exchange over the weekend, the palm oil prices have already shown an increase of Rs 3,000-5,000.
“The market opening on Monday morning will show the real impact. We have also requested the government of India to initiate G-to-G talks with Indonesia,” Mehta said.
It was not immediately clear what are the steps that the government has planned. Phone calls and text messages to Food Secretary Sudhanshu Pandey went unanswered.
Earlier, to prevent the edible prices soaring high — and incidentally days before the Russia-Ukraine war broke out — the government had reduced the agri-cess for Crude Palm Oil (CPO) from 7.5 per cent to 5 per cent with effect from February 12, 2022.
After reduction of the agri-cess, the import tax gap between CPO and Refined Palm Oil has increased to 8.25 per cent. The increase in the gap between the CPO and Refined Palm Oil will benefit the domestic refining industry to import Crude Oil for refining.
Another pre-emptive step was to extend the then current basic rate of import duty of zero percent on Crude Palm Oil, Crude Soybean oil and Crude Sunflower Oil up to September 30, 2022.
The government has also imposed a stock limit in February, which was first extended till March end, June end and now till September end in order to prevent hoarding and black marketing of edible oils.

ARTICLE 54
TITLE: Indonesia palm oil export ban dents FMCG stocks; oil companies rally
URL: https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/markets/stocks/news/indonesia-palm-oil-export-ban-dents-fmcg-stocks-oil-companies-rally/articleshow/91064018.cms

Indonesia's ban on palm oil exports shocked global edible oils markets that already reached record high prices this year, and sparked alarm among major importers of the cooking medium.
Adding more to the worries, there are reports that Malaysia has also increased taxation on exports of palm oil, citing domestic shortages, making it more expensive for importers like India.
Following the update, shares of Britannia Industries tumbled about 6 per cent to Rs 3,150, before paring up half of the losses during the session.
DFM Foods, Tasty Bites Eatables, ADF Foods, Nestle India, Mrs. Bectors Food Specialities declined up to 2 per cent during the session.
India is the top palm oil importer, with a demand of roughly 8 million tonnes of palm oil per year, which is supplied by Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand. India is followed by China, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Egypt and Kenya in terms of buyers.
Global palm oil production slumped in 2020 and 2021 due to a drop in migrant labour on plantations across Southeast Asia, which led to reduced fruit bunch collection and lower fertilizer applications for trees.
Indonesian authorities previously restricted exports of the edible oil between late January and mid-March to try to control domestic cooking oil prices.
Brokerage firm Prabhudas Lilladher believes increase in prices of palm oil will further impact the margins in 1QFY23.
"We don’t rule out further cuts in margins in 1H23. We expect weak to sideways movement for select consumer stocks in the near term," it said in a report.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news, stock tips, Budget 2025, Share Market on Budget 2025 and expert advice, on ETMarkets. Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Subscribe to ET Prime and read the Economic Times ePaper Online.and Sensex Today.
Top Trending Stocks: SBI Share Price, Axis Bank Share Price, HDFC Bank Share Price, Infosys Share Price, Wipro Share Price, NTPC Share Price
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news, stock tips, Budget 2025, Share Market on Budget 2025 and expert advice, on ETMarkets. Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Subscribe to ET Prime and read the Economic Times ePaper Online.and Sensex Today.
Top Trending Stocks: SBI Share Price, Axis Bank Share Price, HDFC Bank Share Price, Infosys Share Price, Wipro Share Price, NTPC Share Price

ARTICLE 55
TITLE: From spreads to shampoo, Indonesia's palm oil ban will rattle your everyday life
URL: https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/small-biz/trade/exports/insights/from-spreads-to-shampoo-indonesias-palm-oil-ban-will-rattle-your-everyday-life/articleshow/91066437.cms

Indonesia counts for more than half of the global supply of the edible oil, which is used in everything from cakes, chocolate, margarine and frying fats to cosmetics, soap, shampoo and cleaning products.
It is also key to Ferrero Rocher chocolates and Nutella spread, giving them a smooth texture and longer shelf life.
Here is a summary of how much palm oil companies use, based on the most up-to-date data available:
UNILEVER
Unilever said in 2016 that it used about 1 million tonnes of crude palm oil and its derivatives and about 0.5 million tonnes of crude palm kernel oil and its derivatives.
The company declined to give more up-to-date data.
NESTLE
In 2020, the maker of KitKat chocolate bars bought about 453,000 tonnes of palm oil and palm kernel oil, mostly from Indonesia and Malaysia, its website says.
It uses about 88 suppliers from more than 1,600 mills in 21 countries. It also buys from Latin America, Africa, and other parts of Asia.
Palm Oil crisis: High prices will benefit farmers and business, says Nadir Godrej
The company used about 605,000 tonnes of palm oil and palm kernel oil, and their derivatives, in its 2020-2021 fiscal year, a company document showed. It is used in its fabric and home care categories and beauty products.
Its purchases account for about 0.8% of global palm oil production and it sells palm oil byproduct it cannot use. Some 70% of its palm oil is sourced from refineries in Malaysia and Indonesia.
MONDELEZ INTERNATIONAL
The Oreo cookie maker said that it purchases “large quantities” of palm oil in a securities filing.
It accounts for 0.5% of palm oil consumption globally, according to its website.
Danone said it purchased a total of 71,000 tonnes of palm oil in 2018.
FERRERO
The Italian maker of Nutella sourced 85% of its palm oil supplies from Malaysia and only 9% from Indonesia in the first half of 2021, according to its website.
L'OREAL
L'Oreal said in 2021 that it purchased less than 310 tonnes of palm oil and also used, from its suppliers, ingredients including palm derivatives in a quantity equivalent of 71,000 tonnes.

ARTICLE 56
TITLE: Indonesia bans palm oil exports as global food inflation spikes
URL: https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/small-biz/trade/exports/insights/indonesia-bans-palm-oil-exports-as-global-food-inflation-spikes/articleshow/91067523.cms

The halting of shipments of the cooking oil and its raw material, widely used in products ranging from cakes to cosmetics, could raise costs for packaged food producers globally and force governments to choose between using vegetable oils in food or for biofuel. Indonesia counts for more than half of global palm oil supply.
In a video broadcast, Indonesia's President Joko Widodo said he wanted to ensure the availability of food products at home, after global food inflation soared to a record high following Russia's invasion of major crop producer Ukraine.
"I will monitor and evaluate the implementation of this policy so availability of cooking oil in the domestic market becomes abundant and affordable," he said.
The announcement will hurt consumers in top buyer India and globally, said, Atul Chaturvedi, president of trade body the Solvent Extractors Association of India (SEA).
Chicago Board of Trade.
palm oil exports in January that was lifted in March.
Household product and food companies including Procter & Gamble Co, Nestle SA and Unilever PLC are large purchasers of palm oil. Oreo cookie maker Mondelez International Inc accounts for 0.5% of palm oil consumption globally, according to its website.
Other countries have experimented with crop protectionism to try to keep domestic prices down. Argentina, the world's top exporter of processed soy, briefly halted new overseas sales of soy oil and meal in mid-March before hiking the export tax rate on those products to 33% from 31%.
The U.S. Department of Agriculture urged international cooperation during the war in Ukraine, rather than export bans.
Global edible oil markets have been roiled this year by Russia's invasion of Ukraine, a move Russia calls a "special operation" to demilitarise its neighbour, which cut off shipments of sunflower oil from the region.
The Black Sea accounts for 76% of world sunoil exports and commercial shipping from the region has been severely affected since Russian forces entered Ukraine in February.
Large supplies of alternatives including soy and rapeseed oil are not readily available either, after droughts hurt the most recent crops in Argentina, Brazil and Canada.
New facilities for processing soy and canola oil are expected to open in the United States and Canada respectively in coming years, as demand for plant-based biofuels grows, but ramping up production in the near term will be difficult.
Industry group the Clean Fuels Alliance America said the move could hurt biofuel producers, even though U.S. biodiesel and renewable diesel producers don't use palm oil, as supplies of all oils are tight.
'SKY'S THE LIMIT'
"Sky would be the limit for edible oil prices now. Buyers were banking on palm oil after sunoil supplies fell because of the Ukraine war," a Mumbai-based dealer at a global trading firm said.
"Now they (buyers) don't have any option as soyoil supplies are also limited."
Malaysian producers say the world's No. 2 palm oil exporter, which is facing a production shortfall due to a pandemic-induced labour shortage, is unlikely to be able to plug the gap.
Indonesia has since 2018 stopped the issuance of new permits for palm oil plantations, often blamed for deforestation and destroying habitats of endangered animals such as orangutans.
Palm oil industry association GAPKI said it would adhere to the policy but had reservations.
"If this policy has any negative impact on the sustainability of the palm oil sector, we would ask the government to re-evaluate the policy," it said in a statement.
In Indonesia, the retail price of cooking oil averages 26,436 rupiah ($1.84) per litre, up more than 40% so far this year. In some provinces across the country, the prices have nearly doubled in the past month alone, according to a price monitoring page.
Demonstrations by students have taken place in several cities across Indonesia in recent days over high cooking oil prices.
Indonesia's government has set a cap of 14,000 rupiah per litre for bulk cooking oil, but Trade Ministry data showed that it was sold at more than 18,000 rupiah this month.
A government investigation is underway into alleged corruption involving sought-after export permits.
($1 = 14,356.0000 rupiah)

ARTICLE 57
TITLE: Indonesia's palm oil export ban leaves global buyers with no plan B
URL: https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/small-biz/trade/exports/insights/indonesias-palm-oil-export-ban-leaves-global-buyers-with-no-plan-b/articleshow/91067236.cms

The move by the world's biggest palm oil producer to ban exports from Thursday will lift prices of all major edible oils including palm oil, soyoil, sunflower oil and rapeseed oil, industry watchers predict. That will place extra strain on cost-sensitive consumers in Asia and Africa hit by higher fuel and food prices.
"Indonesia's decision affects not only palm oil availability, but vegetable oils worldwide," James Fry, chairman of commodities consultancy LMC International, told Reuters.
Palm oil - used in everything from cakes and frying fats to cosmetics and cleaning products - accounts for nearly 60% of global vegetable oil shipments, and top producer Indonesia accounts for around a third of all vegetable oil exports. It announced the export ban on April 22, until further notice, in a move to tackle rising domestic prices.
"This is happening when the export tonnages of all other major oils are under pressure: soybean oil due to droughts in South America; rapeseed oil due to disastrous canola crops in Canada; and sunflower oil because of Russia's war on Ukraine," Fry said.
Solvent Extractors Association of India (SEA).
NO ALTERNATIVE
Importers such as India, Bangladesh and Pakistan will try to increase palm oil purchases from Malaysia, but the world's second-biggest palm oil producer cannot fill the gap created by Indonesia, Chaturvedi said.
Indonesia typically supplies nearly half of India's total palm oil imports, while Pakistan and Bangladesh import nearly 80% of their palm oil from Indonesia.
"Nobody can compensate for the loss of Indonesian palm oil. Every country is going to suffer," said Rasheed JanMohd, chairman of Pakistan Edible oil Refiners Association (PEORA).
In February, prices of vegetable oils jumped to a record high as sunflower oil supplies were disrupted from the Black Sea region.
The price rise raised working capital requirements for oil refiners, who were holding lower inventories than normal in anticipation of a pullback in prices, said a Mumbai-based dealer with a global trading firm.
Instead, all oil prices have rallied further.
"Refiners have been caught on the wrong foot. Now they can't afford to wait for a few weeks. They have to make purchases to run plants," the dealer said.
As Indonesia has allowed loading until April 28, consuming countries will have enough supply for the first half of May, but could face shortages from the second half, said a refiner based in Dhaka.
South Asian refiners will only slowly release oil into the market as they know supplies are limited, he said.
In India, the world's biggest vegetable oil importer, palm oil prices rose by nearly 5% over the weekend as industry prices in shortages in the coming months. Prices also rose in Pakistan and Bangladesh.

ARTICLE 58
TITLE: Edible oil prices may rise 15-20% as Indonesia bans palm oil exports
URL: https://www.financialexpress.com/market/commodities/edible-oil-prices-may-rise-15-20-as-indonesia-bans-palm-oil-exports/2502078/

Domestic edible oil prices are likely to shoot up 10% to 15% in the short term after Indonesia, the world’s largest producer and exporter of palm oil, has announced a ban on its export from April 28, industry officials said.
Sunflower oil supplies in India have already been affected due to the Ukraine-Russia war, adding pressure to household budgets.
Indonesian president Joko Widodo on Friday, announced the suspension of all cooking oil and raw material exports from April 28 until further orders. The decision comes in the wake of a severe shortage and skyrocketing prices for edible oil in the southeast Asian nation.
The retail price of cooking oil in Indonesia averages at 26,436 rupiahs ($1.84) per litre, up more than 40% so far this year. In some provinces, prices have nearly doubled in the past month alone.
The world annually consumes around 240 million tonne of edible oil, of which 80 million tonne (34 %) is palm oil.
India imports around 0.6 million tonne of palm oil, 50% of which comes from Indonesia and the remaining from Malaysia, said Sandeep Bajoria, chief executive of Sunvin Group, a Mumbai-based vegetable oil brokerage and consultancy firm. The total monthly export is around 1.1 million tonne. If the 0.3-million-tonne flow is affected, it will push up prices further, he said. “Consumers will have to consume less edible oil. After sunflower oil prices went up, they started consuming palm oil. Now there is no alternative, since palm oil is the cheapest oil,” he said.
Bajoria said the ban may not last more than a month since Indonesia already has 5 million tonne of palm oil and produces another 4 million tonne every month. It consumes only around 1.4 million tonne and has surplus of 2.3 million tonne every month, and not enough storage, he said. Edible oil prices in India are likely to go up by Rs 10 per kg, he said.
BV Mehta, executive director, Solvent Extractors Association of India, said India should activate its diplomatic channels to prevent this “catastrophe”.
“Already sunflower oil supplies were hit due to the Russia-Ukraine war. Now if palm oil supply is disrupted then prices will skyrocket. Prices were already high and Indonesia’s decision will add to the pressure and hurt supplies,” he said.
Indonesia produces 48 million tonne of palm oil annually. The local consumption, including a biofuel mandate, is 17 million tonne, so it has around 31 million tonne for export. This issue could have been managed in a much better manner rather than suspending exports worldwide, Mehta said.
Sudhakar Desai, president, Indian Vegetable Oil Association, raised doubts about the sustainability of Indonesia’s decision, as the country may find it difficult to handle the huge quantities of palm oil it produces.
“Indonesia exports nearly 20 lakh tonne of palm oil per month. Given the storage constraints in Indonesia, I don’t think they would be able to sustain after fifteen days. After meeting its requirements and improving the supply chain, I think it would relax this intended ban,” he said.
The inflationary pressure in Indonesia is consequent of its own policy of supporting the domestic biofuel industry of 8 million tonne of oil, he said.
Prices in India have already gone up by 3.3% in 24 hours and are likely to go up by 10 to 15% in the short term. The next one month is going to be
difficult not only for India but for the rest of the world as well, Desai said.
India’s Wholesale Price Index (WPI) rose 14.55 % in March to a four-month high. The ban on export of palm oil by Indonesia would mean another set of price hikes in the coming months despite the government’s efforts to promote a]indigenous supply of the edible oil.

ARTICLE 59
TITLE: A Look At What Is Likely To Get Costlier After Indonesia Bans Palm Oil Exports
URL: https://www.india.com/business/from-chocolates-to-shampoos-a-look-at-what-is-likely-to-get-costlier-after-indonesia-bans-palm-oil-exports-5356730/

New Delhi: It seems like the consumers in the country may have to bear with bigger holes in their pockets for a while now. Indonesia, last week, banned the export of palm oil from April 28. It must be noted that it is the largest producer of palm oil in the world. But for the consumers, this is worrisome because palm oil is used in manufacturing a wide variety of products including shampoos, soaps and noodles. This comes as India is fighting multi-month high inflation, driven by high food and fuel prices.
According to a report by News18, the island country banned the export of palm oil because the supply has been less and the prices have skyrocketed, especially in the Southeast Asia region. The rise in the price of palm oil, which is a major component in the production of detergents and cosmetics, will push the input costs higher.
The report also stated that India imports almost 80 lakh tonnes of palm oil from across the world. The impact of this decision is already visible in the FMCG stocks. On Monday, Nifty FMCG was one of the worst performers in all indices. It was down almost 2 per cent, with Godrej Consumer Products, Marico and ITC being the top losers. Nestle, Dabur, Britannia, Hindustan Unilever all the big FMCG stocks were in the red.
According to Reuters, a rise in palm oil prices will further increase the prices of other edible oils like soy oil, sunflower oil and rapeseed oil. Analyst Jefferies also stated that it will increase the pressure on companies like HUL, GCPL, Britannia and Nestle.
In addition to worries in Indonesia, Malaysia, which is the second-largest producer of palm oil is also witnessing a shortfall in production due to a shortage in labour. The Covid-19 pandemic has further increased the trouble for the industry. With the top 2 producers in deep waters, the pressure will ultimately fall on the consumers.

ARTICLE 60
TITLE: Indonesia’s surprise export ban to exclude crude palm oil: Report | Stock Market News
URL: https://www.livemint.com/market/commodities/indonesias-surprise-ban-of-cooking-oil-exports-will-not-be-strict-as-feared-11650879378335.html

Indonesia’s surprise export ban to exclude crude palm oil: Report
Indonesia will only halt exports of bulk and packaged RBD palm olein, a higher value product that has been processed
Bloomberg
Updated25 Apr 2022, 03:27 PM IST
Palm oil slumped on prospects that top producer Indonesia’s surprise ban of cooking oil exports will not be strict as feared.
Indonesia will only halt exports of bulk and packaged RBD palmolein, a higher value product that has been processed. Exports of crude palm oil and RBD palm oil will still be allowed, according to people familiar with the matter.
Benchmark futures initially rallied after Indonesia said Friday that a shipment halt on all cooking oil will start from April 28 and last until the government deems a domestic shortage resolved. The announcement came as a shock to the market as a sweeping ban will worsen global food inflation and aggravate volatility in crop markets still reeling from the war.
Palm oil for July delivery tumbled as much as 4.1% to 6,097 ringgit a ton in Kuala Lumpur after jumping 7% in early trade. Soybean oil, palm’s closest rival, retreated from all-time highs in Chicago to drop 1.5%.
“Details are still scant for now, and traders are reacting on speculation that the impact of the Indonesian ban may be less than initially thought,” said David Ng, senior trader at IcebergX Sdn. in Kuala Lumpur. It will be a slight reprieve for the ban to be limited to olein and not other products, he added.
Fruits of the oil palm tree are crushed to produce crude palm oil. Processing crude palm oil produces refined, bleached and deodorized palm oil, which can be further processed into RBD palm olein. RBD palm olein is primarily used as cooking oils and in industrial frying of processed foods.

ARTICLE 61
TITLE: How Indonesia's ban on palm oil exports will hurt us | Stock Market News
URL: https://www.livemint.com/market/how-indonesia-s-ban-on-palm-oil-exports-hurts-us-11650906583398.html

The abrupt ban on palm oil exports by Indonesia, its biggest exporter, is expected to rock household economics globally. Palm oil is among the world’s most-used cooking oils, and India’s dependence on Indonesia is expected to deal a supply-side shock. Mint takes a look:
Why did Indonesia take this step?
Indonesia has clamped down on exports starting 28 April primarily because of soaring inflation in the country. This is not the first time the South East Asian country decided to arrest local prices by banning exports—it had announced limited curbs in January too. However, brokerages suggest that the ban will probably be a temporary measure of two to three weeks, as Indonesia cannot afford to lose out on exports for long. Indonesia’s president Joko Widodo has stated that he would ensure that the availability of cooking oil in the domestic market becomes “abundant and affordable”.
How will this ban affect India?
The export ban could send food inflation soaring as India is the largest importer of palm oil from Indonesia. It imports about eight million tonnes of palm oil annually; the commodity accounts for nearly 40% share of India’s overall edible oil consumption basket. Pradeep S. Mehta, secretary-general, CUTS International, says edible oil prices could surge as much as 100-200% in India if the government fails to find a new source of palm oil. Cooking oil prices are already at record levels as the Ukraine war disrupted shipments of sunflower oil. Prior to the war, the Black Sea region made up over 75% of global sunflower oil exports.
How could it impact packaged goods firms?
Since palm oil and its derivatives are used in the production of several household goods, the impact of the ban could eat into the margins of Indian packaged consumer goods players. Analysts said listed firms such as Hindustan Unilever Ltd, Godrej Consumer Products Ltd, Britannia Industries Ltd, and Nestle SA could feel the impact of the ban in the near term.
What are India’s import options?
India is most likely to turn to Malaysia, the second-biggest palm oil exporter, to plug the gap. But Malaysia is also facing a labour shortage owing to the pandemic which has resulted in a production shortfall. In a recent note, Edelweiss said Malaysia is unlikely to be able to plug the gap. Malaysia exports 18 million tonnes of palm oil annually compared to 30 million tonnes exported by Indonesia. India could also explore importing from Thailand and Africa—they produce three million tonnes each.
How can India mitigate the impact of the ban?
Palm oil prices rose by nearly 5% over the weekend after the announcement of the export ban. Finding an immediate solution is going to be a challenge. Experts said even if India manages to find an alternative source, prices will be high as a major exporter is now out of the calculation. The industry expects India to engage with Indonesia on an urgent basis, before the ban comes into effect on 28 April. Besides, the Centre is likely to negotiate with other oil-supplying nations in Latin America and Canada.

ARTICLE 62
TITLE: Palm oil ban: Govt urged to start talks with Indonesia
URL: https://www.rediff.com/business/report/palm-oil-ban-govt-urged-to-start-talks-with-indonesia/20220425.htm

The cooking oil national industry body -- Solvent Extractors' Association (SEA) of India has suggested immediate initiation of government to government (G2G) dialogue with Indonesia on the proposed palm oil export ban from April 28 by them as it would have an adverse repercussions in India.
Indonesia, which is the world's largest producer of palm oil and meets nearly 50 per cent of the total palm oil requirement in India annually, had announced to ban exports till further notice apparently to contain edible oil prices in their domestic market.
"We have suggested our government initiate dialogue with Indonesian counterparts at the highest diplomatic level on the cooking oil export ban.
"This will have serious repercussions in our domestic market as half of our total imports of palm oil is from Indonesia and no one can fill up this void," SEA director general B V Mehta told PTI.
SEA liaisons with the Union Food ministry, he said.
Mehta said, "... the industry was not expecting a ban.There will be an immediate impact on prices in the domestic market from Monday itself as the news of the ban has distorted the sentiment."
The cooking oil industry was prepared for a tweak in export duty at worst by Indonesia which is grappling with its cooking oil price spike in their domestic market by about 40-50 per cent.
Indonesia was levying $575 per tonne export duty.
"The news will push Malaysia oil prices higher which is our major alternate sourcing market," Mehta said.
"India consumes 22.5 million tonne of edible oil annually of which 9-9.5 million tonne is met by domestic supplies and the rest by imports.
"About 3.5-4 million tonne of palm oil is imported by India annually from Indonesia," he said.
With the Ukraine war, the sunflower and soybean oil is already under pressure as imports have halved but the situation was managed with other variants of oils.
But, the Indonesian oil ban will have a "devastating effect" unless sorted out quickly, an edible oil refiner official said.
The last Indian Economic Survey had blamed rising price of oil and fats and it was a major driver of inflation in the foods and beverages category in the fiscal FY'22.
Oil and fats contributed to around 60 per cent of food and beverages inflation in the country, despite having a weight of only 7.8 per cent in the basket.
Inflation both at the retail and wholesale levels for edible oil had begun in Q4FY19-20 and still continues.
The Wholesale Price Index or WPI -based inflation already surged to 14.55 per cent in March 2022, after a 13.11 per cent reading in February 2022.
Edible oils such as palm oil are a key raw material for FMCG and HoReCa (hotels, restaurants and caterers) industries and a rise in the prices of these commodities impacts consumer goods beyond food products such as soaps, shampoos, etc.

ARTICLE 63
TITLE: FMCGs may pinch more if Indonesia bans crude palm oil exports too
URL: https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/markets/commodities/news/fmcgs-may-pinch-more-if-indonesia-bans-crude-palm-oil-exports-too/articleshow/91087103.cms

About 60% of India's palm oil demand is met through imports, of which Indonesia and Malaysia account for a little more than three-fourths of total imports. Palm and its derivatives account for over 20% of the input cost basket of the consumer companies and the margin stress is likely to exacerbate further. "There will definitely be another round of price hikes. It is difficult to ascertain the exact percentage since prices of palm and other raw materials are highly volatile making it difficult to predict where they will stabilise," said Mayank Shah, senior category head, Parle Products.
Last Friday, Indonesia banned the palm oil exports until further notice, a move that industry officials and analysts felt could make all major edible oils, including palm and sunflower oil, costlier. However, Bloomberg on Monday citing sources reported that Indonesia is likely to only halt exports of bulk and packaged refined, bleached and deodorised (RBD) palm olein.
'Discretionary Spending may be Hit'
Exports of crude palm oil and RBD palm oil could be allowed.
Food companies and soap makers use crude palm oil and its derivative but not refined palm oil to manufacture their products.
Nestle.
While most listed consumer firms are yet to announce quarterly earnings performance, the impact of cost inflation has been visible in Nestle India's first-quarter margin which contracted 330 bps during the quarter ended March. Within the personal care segment, prices of soaps have already increased 26% while shampoo and hair colour saw an 8-9% price revision since March 2021, according to a price tracker report by Bizom, a sales automation firm that transacts with 7.5 million retail stores.
"Commodities such as rice, spices and edible oil have seen their price tag increase anywhere between 18% and 37% while packaged food products including snacks, bread and cereals had 8-12% price hikes," said Akshay D'Souza, chief of growth and insights at Mobisy Technologies, which owns Bizom.
Companies said high prices, especially in essentials such as edible oil, impact the overall household budget leading to calibrated consumption of non-essential products.
"Consumers tend to cut spending on discretionary products since edible oil is essential and cannot be replaced. So a single category can impact overall consumption in a situation where most of the products are getting pricier. We saw severe inflation since January and expect demand by June quarter to be subdued due to price hikes," said Anil Chugh, president, consumer care business, Wipro Consumer Care and Lighting, which sells brands including Santoor and Safewash.
'Full Picture to Emerge in Q1'
The prices of palm oil have risen 50% in the last 12 months and trebled over the past two years. According to CLSA, an 80% inflation in palm oil requires a 16% price hike to maintain absolute gross profit per unit for soaps while a 32% price hike is needed to maintain its gross margin for companies.
"While the full impact of the sharp increase in input costs due to prolonged Russia-Ukraine geopolitical tensions will be witnessed only in the first quarter of FY23 after companies have exhausted their lower-cost inventory of 3-4 months on average, we note fourth quarter of FY22 continued to see elevated input-cost inflation. This led to product price increases once again lagging inflation and pressuring gross product margins for the past 10 consecutive quarters," said Nomura in an investor note.
Last week, ITC chairman and managing director Sanjiv Puri at the India Economic Conclave 2022 said inflation is not the only parameter that influences consumption growth. "Inflation is a challenge. But on account of the Russia-Ukraine conflict, there are rising prices of agri-commodities on one side, which is creating inflation, and on the other hand, is going to pump a lot more money into the rural economy. The crop is also good with higher realisations. Input costs have increased but the net is a positive," said Puri.
Soaps, shampoo, chocolates and biscuits have a weightage of around 1.6% in the consumer price index, so every 10% hike in these products will translate into a 10 basis points increase in the index.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news, stock tips, Budget 2025, Share Market on Budget 2025 and expert advice, on ETMarkets. Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Subscribe to ET Prime and read the Economic Times ePaper Online.and Sensex Today.
Top Trending Stocks: SBI Share Price, Axis Bank Share Price, HDFC Bank Share Price, Infosys Share Price, Wipro Share Price, NTPC Share Price
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news, stock tips, Budget 2025, Share Market on Budget 2025 and expert advice, on ETMarkets. Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Subscribe to ET Prime and read the Economic Times ePaper Online.and Sensex Today.
Top Trending Stocks: SBI Share Price, Axis Bank Share Price, HDFC Bank Share Price, Infosys Share Price, Wipro Share Price, NTPC Share Price

ARTICLE 64
TITLE: FMCG stocks decline sharply as Indonesia bans palm oil exports
URL: https://www.financialexpress.com/market/fmcg-stocks-decline-sharply-as-indonesia-bans-palm-oil-exports/2503176/

Shares of fast moving consumer goods (FMCG) companies sharply declined on Monday after Indonesia, a major palm oil producer and exporter, announced a ban on the export of the commodity from April 28, primarily to tackle rising prices at home. Palm oil remains a key ingredient in major food processing industries and quick service restaurants.
Analysts believe that the ban on exports will lead to an increase in prices in the domestic market. “Given that palm oil is 60% of the total oil imports, and Indonesia being the second-largest seller, it will push domestic prices up in coming months. FMCG staples majors such as Britannia, Hindustan Unilever, Nestle India and ITC would be among the key companies affected directly as a result of the ban and higher prices,” Amnish Aggarwal, director – research, Prabhudas Lilladher, wrote in a note on Monday.
Following the announcement, shares of Britannia Industries plunged 6.3% intra-day on Monday, while Hindustan Unilever, ITC, and Nestle India fell 3.8%, 3.4%, and 2.17%, respectively. On the contrary, shares of leading edible oil manufacturer Adani Wilmar surged 5% and hit a new high of Rs 764.60.
With India being the largest importer of palm oil, the announcement of the ban will affect the country the most, said analysts. Of overall edible oil imports, palm oil accounts for nearly 60-65%, Prabhudas Lilladher said in the note. The brokerage expects margins to be impacted in the upcoming quarter.
gWe believe increase in prices of palm oil will further impact the margins in 1QFY23. We expect margins to bottom out in 1HFY23 given inflation across inputs. We don’t rule out further cut in margins in 1H23. We expect weak-to-sideways movement for select consumer stocks in the near term,” said Prabhudas Lilladher.

ARTICLE 65
TITLE: Palm oil ban: Indonesia prepares to widen palm oil export ban
URL: https://www.indiatoday.in/business/story/palm-oil-ban-indonesia-prepares-to-widen-palm-oil-export-ban-1942053-2022-04-26

Palm oil ban: Indonesia prepares to widen palm oil export ban
The world's biggest palm oil exporter plans to halt shipments of refined, bleached and deodorized (RBD) palm olein but will allow exports of crude palm oil or other derivatives from Thursday.
Indonesia is prepared to widen its ban on exports of refined palm olein if it faces domestic shortages of derivatives used in the production of cooking oil, according to details presented at a meeting between government and industry officials.
The world's biggest palm oil exporter plans to halt shipments of refined, bleached and deodorized (RBD) palm olein but will allow exports of crude palm oil or other derivatives from Thursday, senior government official Musdhalifah Machmud, who verified the details presented, told Reuters.
RBD palm olein accounts for around 40 per cent of Indonesia's total exports of palm oil products, according to analysts' estimates, which means the export ban could significantly affect export earnings in Southeast Asia's biggest economy.
IMPACT ON EXPORTS
Indonesia typically exports about $2.5 billion to $3 billion of palm oil products per month.
The authorities will strictly monitor domestic supply of refined palm oil and crude palm oil, which are used as raw materials to make RBD olein, according to presentation slides.
"If there is shortage of refined palm oil, then further export bans can be carried out," said one slide, which was presented to palm oil companies on Monday.
President Joko Widodo announced the ban on exports of cooking oil and its raw material on Friday to help control soaring domestic prices, but provided no details.
Indonesia's announcement has sent global edible oil prices soaring as supplies were already choked by other factors such as drought and shortages from Russia's invasion of major crop producer Ukraine.
Markets had previously thought the ban would cover a wider range of palm oil products, sending the rupiah as well as shares of Indonesian palm oil companies tumbling on Monday.
KEY MEETING
Indonesia's economic affairs ministry held a meeting with cooking oil producers on Tuesday to discuss the export ban, according to an industry source.
Musim Mas, a Singapore-based private palm oil company, said the smaller scope of the ban showed the government was taking into account the impact on the industry and smallholder farmers.
However, Carolyn Lim, its senior manager for corporate communications, also said the smaller scope meant the ban could last longer.
"The duration that this will pan out, that's going to impact markets too," she said.
Some analysts expect the ban to be temporary due to limited domestic palm oil storage capacity.
CRITICISM
The Indonesian government has been criticised by some analysts and politicians for erratic policymaking to contain the rise in cooking oil prices, having already implemented and revoked an export restriction earlier in the year.
"These kinds of policy announcements that are not well communicated adds to some of the jitters that are already building," said Nomura's chief ASEAN economist Euben Paracuelles.
ALSO READ | LIC IPO: Will share market remain volatile during mega launch?

ARTICLE 66
TITLE: Indonesia's Palm Oil Export Ban: Cooking Oil, Food Prices Set To Spike On, Indian Edible Oil Market To Take A Hit 
URL: https://www.indiatoday.in/newsmo/video/indonesia-s-palm-oil-export-ban-cooking-oil-food-prices-set-to-spike-on-indian-edible-oil-market-to-take-a-hit-1942273-2022-04-26

Prime Minister Narendra Modi hailed the Bharat Innovates programme launched by the Ministry of Education, saying that it weaves together young Indian minds and European capital.
Indonesia's Palm Oil Export Ban: Cooking Oil, Food Prices Set To Spike On, Indian Edible Oil Market To Take A Hit
Indonesia has decided to ban exports of cooking oil and its raw materials to reduce domestic shortages and hold down skyrocketing prices.
Their President Joko Widodo made the announcement amid protests in the country's capital against rising food costs.
Indonesia and Malaysia are the world's largest exporters of palm oil. Edible oil prices were already up but Indonesia’s recent ban on exports of cooking oil is going to make it worse.
LATEST VIDEOS
Prime Minister Narendra Modi was welcomed with a warm hug by French President Emmanuel Macron on Sunday as the duo arrived to jointly inaugurate the Bharat Innovates summit in France's Nice. The leaders also exchanged enthusiastic handshakes at the event. Bharat Innovates 2026 is a three-day innovation conclave bringing together startups and venture capital funds from India, France and other countries. PM Modi is scheduled to leave for Slovakia later on Sunday for the second leg of his ongoing two-nation trip.
One person was killed, and three others were injured after a Maruti Eeco van went out of control and rammed two motorbikes from behind before rolling over onto its side in Bengaluru. The accident occurred around 6.45 am on Saturday. The person who lost his life has been identified as 45-year-old Sukhdev, who was travelling in the four-wheeler. The injured were rushed to a nearby hospital and are said to be out of danger. In a CCTV footage of the accident, one of the injured motorcyclists, along with bystanders, was seen rushing to help a man who got trapped under the overturned car. Traffic police have registered a case and launched an investigation into the incident. The preliminary probe is focused on whether speeding or negligent driving led to the accident.
Women's T20 World Cup 2026, IND vs PAK: Harmanpreet Kaur acknowledged the pressure of the India vs Pakistan clash but said the team will focus on enjoying the occasion and playing their best cricket, treating it like any other match.

ARTICLE 67
TITLE: Ruchi Soya says details of Indonesia's palm oil export ban a relief | Stock Market News
URL: https://www.livemint.com/market/commodities/ruchi-soya-says-details-of-indonesia-s-palm-oil-export-ban-a-relief-11650964863628.html

The edible oil industry in India got a big relief after top grower Indonesia clarified it would only halt exports of some palm oil products instead of a complete ban as widely expected, according to Ruchi Soya Industries Ltd.
India is the world’s biggest importer of vegetable oils and is particularly at risk from Indonesian policy changes. Indonesia said Friday it would ban all exports of cooking oil before clarifying days later it only applies to RBD palm olein and not crude palm oil, a move that’s sparked wild swings in the market.
“We are very comfortable now with the clarification,” Ruchi Soya Chief Executive Officer Sanjeev Asthana said in a Bloomberg Television interview on Tuesday. “I don’t anticipate much of a problem going forward,” he said. The company is one of the largest cooking oil and oilseed processors in India.
While the ban on palm olein accounts for 30% to 40% of Indonesia’s palm oil shipments, less than initially feared, it could still have serious ramifications for the world as the country accounts for a third of global vegetable oil trade. World food prices are already at a record high and can ill afford another disruption to food supply after massive chaos sparked by the war in Ukraine.
Edible oil prices in India have been rising, putting the government on notice. Authorities have abolished import duties and clamped down on hoarding, but prices continued to climb. Local prices of edible oils have surged as much as 17% in New Delhi since the war in Ukraine erupted late February.
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine hit vegetable oil supplies from the two nations that ship about 80% of sunflower oil cargoes. India can replace sunflower oil supplies with soybean oil, Asthana said. A large winter-sown rapeseed crop will also help to boost availability of cooking oils in India.
Still, it would be a challenge in the next three to four months if “the conflict continues longer than what we think,” Asthana said.
India imported about 500,000 tons of crude palm oil from Indonesia in the five months ended March, while RBD palm olein purchases totaled 475,000 tons, according to data compiled by the Solvent Extractors’ Association of India.

ARTICLE 68
TITLE: Palm oil export ban by Indonesia begins tomorrow | All you need to know
URL: https://www.indiatoday.in/business/story/palm-oil-export-ban-by-indonesia-begins-tomorrow-all-you-need-to-know-1942569-2022-04-27

Palm oil export ban by Indonesia begins tomorrow | All you need to know
Indonesia, the world's top palm oil producer, meets nearly 50 per cent of the total palm oil requirement in India annually.
Indonesia, the world's top palm oil producer, will ban exports of refined, bleached and deodorized (RBD) palm olein, which are made by crushing palm fruit and processing it to remove impurities. The ban is set to begin on Thursday.
President Joko Widodo announced the ban on Friday to help lower soaring domestic prices.
Palm oil is used in everything from cakes, chocolate, margarine and frying fats to cosmetics, soap, shampoo and cleaning products.
PRICES PLUNGE IN INDONESIA
Small palm oil planters in Indonesia have enjoyed big paycheques in the past year as global vegetable oil prices surged, but these farmers fear they will bear the brunt of the pain from a new export ban coming into effect on Thursday.
Local farmers said prices of fresh palm fruit bunches have already plunged in Kampar, Riau Province on Sumatra island, Reuters reported.
BAN IS TEMPORARY?
Indonesia's ban on palm oil exports is unlikely to last more than a month as Jakarta has limited infrastructure to store the surplus oil and the country faces mounting pressure from buyers to resume shipments, industry officials in Indonesia were quoted as saying by Reuters.
The shock move has lifted prices of all edible oils and sowed confusion and alarm among palm oil exporters and consumers alike.
However, the stock market panic subsided after officials told palm oil executives the ban will only apply to exports of refined, bleached and deodorized (RBD) palm olein, and would not affect flows of crude palm oil or other forms of derivative products.
However, Jakarta will widen the ban "if there is a shortage of refined palm oil," according to a presentation the government gave to companies on Monday. RBD palm olein accounts for around 40% of Indonesia's total exports of palm oil products, according to analysts' estimates.
WORRY FOR INDIA
Indonesia meets nearly 50 per cent of the total palm oil requirement in India annually.
India consumes 22.5 million tonne of edible oil annually, of which 9-9.5 million tonne is met by domestic supplies and the rest by imports. About 3.5-4 million tonne of palm oil is imported by India annually from Indonesia, as per a PTI report.
ALSO READ | Palm oil price to go up? Impact of export ban by Indonesia in India

ARTICLE 69
TITLE: As Indonesia enforces palm oil export ban, should India worry?
URL: http://www.theweek.in/news/biz-tech/2022/04/28/as-indonesia-enforces-palm-oil-export-ban-should-india-worry0.html

Indonesia on Thursday began enforcing a complete ban on exports of palm oil. Indonesia is the biggest producer of palm oil—used in cooking, cosmetics and other fields—in the world.
The Indonesian government enforced the ban citing shortage of cooking oil and soaring prices domestically. “Authorities in Southeast Asia's most populous country fear the scarcity and rising costs could provoke social tensions and have moved to secure supplies of the product, which is used in a range of goods such as chocolate spreads and cosmetics,” AFP reported.
Indonesian President Joko Widodo justified the ban, noting that supplying his country's 270 million residents was his government's “highest priority”.
The ban applies to supply of crude palm oil, RBD palm oil and used cooking oil. The government said the ban would be in force until domestic cooking oil prices ease. The move by Indonesia marks the latest disruption to the global food industry, which has been rocked by the Ukraine war and subsequent rise in oil prices.
Economists told The Jakarta Post that if the ban stayed in place for a month, it would lead to a revenue loss of up to $1.4 billion to Indonesia.
Impact on India
Indonesia supplies about 50 per cent of India's total palm oil requirement. Earlier this week, Solvent Extractors' Association (SEA)—India's main association of cooking oil traders—claimed Indonesia's move would push Malaysia to increase prices of cooking oil. Malaysia is the second-largest exporter of palm oil globally.
“India consumes 22.5 million tonnes of edible oil annually, of which 9-9.5 million tonne is met by domestic supplies and the rest by imports. About 3.5-4 million tonnes of palm oil is imported by India annually from Indonesia,” director general of SEA B.V. Mehta had told PTI.
The last Indian Economic Survey had blamed rising price of oil and fats as a major driver of inflation in the foods and beverages category in the fiscal FY'22. Oil and fats contributed to around 60 per cent of food and beverages inflation in the country, despite having a weight of only 7.8 per cent in the basket.
Santosh Meena, head (research) at Swastika Investmart, told News 18, “Palm oil and its derivatives are used in producing several goods for daily consumption such as soaps, shampoos, biscuits, and noodles. This will negatively affect FMCG companies like HUL, Nestle, Britannia, Godrej Consumer Products Ltd, Marico Ltd., etc. The high prices will leave packaged food products manufacturers, soap manufacturers, and other personal care manufacturers with no other option than to raise prices and thus affecting their volumes.”
While the ban could worsen the inflation situation across sectors, Indonesia's action also has a silver lining. “In certain ways, however, it is also helpful to the Indian local refining industry, as every action to limit the import of refined oils boosts domestic crushing and refining of oil-seeds. Indonesia's curbing of refined imports will help domestic refining even more,” Kshitij Purohit, Lead Commodity at CapitalVia Global Research, told The Times of India.

ARTICLE 70
TITLE: Prices of Packaged Goods to Rise as Indonesia’s Palm Oil Export Ban Comes Into Effect Today
URL: https://www.india.com/business/prices-of-packaged-goods-to-rise-as-indonesias-palm-oil-export-ban-comes-into-effect-today-all-you-need-to-know-5363846/

New Delhi: With Indonesia’s ban on palm oil export coming into effect from Thursday, experts believe the move is expected to push the prices of edible oil and packaged goods upward in India. As palm oil is used as raw material to manufacture products such as soaps, shampoos, noodles and biscuits, its shortage in supply will push the prices of these products further. Indonesia’s palm oil export ban will also raise the input cost of these products and hence the prices will automatically rise.
Being the world’s largest importer of edible oils, India imports over 13.5 million tonnes of edible oil every year. Of the total oil import, over 8-8.5 million tonnes (around 63 per cent) are palm oil. Nearly 45 per cent pf palm oil comes from Indonesia and the remaining from neighbouring Malaysia. Roughly, India imports nearly 4 million tonnes of palm oil from Indonesia each year.
After Indonesia last week announced the ban, the prices of palm oil went up nearly 5 per cent during the following weekend over fears of shortages in the coming months.
Speaking to News 18, Swastika Investmart Head (Research) Santosh Meena said that the palm oil and its derivatives are used in producing several goods for daily consumption such as soaps, shampoos, biscuits, and noodles. “The high prices will leave packaged food products manufacturers, soap manufacturers, and other personal care manufacturers with no other option than to raise prices and thus affecting their volumes,” Santosh Meena said.
Talking about the challenges of the palm oil ban in India, Parle Products Senior Category Head Mayank Shah told News 18 that it is not just for the food companies but for FMCG (fast-moving consumer goods) firms as there are many other players beyond food firms, including those who manufacture soaps and other things. “It’s going to be very challenging,” he said.
Being the world’s largest producer of palm oil, Indonesia, however, clarified that the export ban will not be applicable to crude palm oil but will only cover refined, bleached, deodorised (RBD) palm olein.

ARTICLE 71
TITLE: Food protectionism ramps up as Indonesia bans palm oil exports
URL: https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/small-biz/trade/exports/insights/food-protectionism-ramps-up-as-indonesia-bans-palm-oil-exports/articleshow/91167554.cms

The top shipper imposed a sweeping ban on cooking oil exports, covering palm oil products across the value chain. It’s hard to overstate the importance of the tropical oil as it’s found everywhere today -- in food, soap, lipstick and even printing ink -- which makes Indonesia’s move important for the world.
The move adds to the impact of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, which plunged the global edible oil market into disarray. With food costs surging to all-time highs, governments are taking steps to secure their own supplies. The United Nations has urged leaders to keep trade open, warning that protectionism will drive up prices and lead to empty shelves in countries dependent on imports.
In a move illustrating the country’s determination to enforce the ban, the Navy said it detained two tankers carrying palm oil heading to India and the United Arab Emirates for alleged violation of export controls. The Navy will increase monitoring and security in the country’s waters to prevent smuggling.
The country is certainly not making it easy to navigate its palm export ban. The top producer said Friday it would suspend all shipments of cooking oil, sending prices of palm and its substitute soyoil soaring. Then late Monday, reports emerged that only palm olein, a refined product, would be halted, prompting a swift retreat in prices and traders rushing to comply with the ban.
The move is “one of the biggest acts of agriculture nationalism so far during this surge in food prices,” said Tobin Gorey, an agri-commodities strategist at Commonwealth Bank of Australia.
Palm oil futures dropped 1.1% to close at 6,910 ringgit ($1,583) a ton on Thursday, paring gains this week. Prices jumped by the 10% trading limit a day earlier, hours before Indonesia announced the widened export ban.
President Joko Widodo said late Wednesday that the ban would be lifted once the local demand for food staples is met, adding that it was “ironic” that the country had difficulty getting cooking oil. The decision to ban exports came after earlier policies weren’t effective in easing the shortage, he said.
It is uncertain if the ban will have the desired effect. The government acknowledged that the policy may cut the country’s palm output and result in unsold harvests for farmers. There are also concerns about when Indonesian producers will run out of capacity to store the oil they can no longer export.
“With this hard stance, the government is punishing errant refiners by punishing the whole Indonesian plantation industry,” RHB Research analyst Hoe Lee Leng wrote in a note. “All players in Indonesia would likely suffer, although pure upstream exporters would likely suffer more.”

ARTICLE 72
TITLE: Edible oil industry readies for tough time over Indonesian ban on exports
URL: https://indianexpress.com/article/cities/pune/edible-oil-industry-readies-for-tough-time-over-indonesian-ban-on-exports-7892515/

Edible oil industry readies for tough time over Indonesian ban on exports
However, the Indonesian government soon clarified that the ban was only extended to palmolien oil while crude palm oil (CPO) and RBD palm oil are allowed to be shipped.
INDIA’S EDIBLE oil industry is up for some tough time after Indonesia completely banned the export of palm oil and its derivatives. This followed an ongoing flip flop over the exports, which was going on for the past one week or so.
Last week, the edible oil industry was shaken after news came from Indonesia about a complete ban on palm oil and its derivatives. However, the Indonesian government soon clarified that the ban was only extended to palmolien oil while crude palm oil (CPO) and RBD palm oil are allowed to be shipped. Industry experts pointed out Indonesia’s ban would not affect the Indian markets much.
Earlier this week, the Indonesian government put a blanket ban on exports including CPO and RBP palm oil also. According to agency reports, this was done mainly to ensure Indonesian consumers get the cooking fat at a reasonable price.
Indonesia is the world’s largest producer and exporter of palm oil in the world producing around 470 lakh tonnes of oil. Around 220 lakh tonnes of which is exported with India alone accounting for 39.61 lakh tonnes of import. Malaysia is another major exporter with India procuring 38.59 lakh tonnes from the country. Of the 120-130 lakh tonnes of edible oil imports in the country, palm oil constitutes 60 per cent of the basket.
Given the heavy dependence that India has on imports, any supply disruption is bound to affect the domestic prices. Palm oil is used mainly in the industrial savoury units, which have been already reeling under the price rise of wheat. Many in the industry did not rule out a price hike in biscuits and other savoury items due to the present scenario.
Atul Chaturvedi, President of Solvent and Extractors Association (SEA) — the apex body of edible oil manufacturers — said this decision is bound to have an effect in India. “It is bound to have serious repercussions as Indonesia supplies around 3-3.5 million tonnes of oil per month. Malaysia cannot compensate. How long they can hold is a million-dollar question,” he said.
Inflation in the country has been a cause of concern with food inflation rising by 8 per cent. Prices of edible oils have been a cause of concern with all prices trading near the Rs 160-170per litre in the retail markets. With Indonesia banning palm oil, the chances of palm oil prices closing the gap between sunflower and other soya oil prices is now a reality.
Pushan Sharma, director of Crisil Research talked about the export ban being lifted after the Indonesian domestic price falls below a certain level.
Indonesia’s decision to ban exports, industry sources say is mainly to control the oil inflation felt by its citizens. This would be the third effort taken by the Indonesian government to control domestic oil inflation. Earlier, it had mandated that 30 per cent of the export quota should be sold domestically. Increased fuel prices have led to rising demand for palm oil for the manufacturing of biodiesel.
Sougata Niyogi, CEO – Oil Palm, Godrej Agrovet Limited, also said that this ban would not be long lasting.
“But May looks very bullish. The premium of soya and sunflower refined oil over palm oil will narrow down. The overall price outlook is strong till August-September; that is, till the next crop arrives in the market. The current conditions are going to keep farmers’ morale high on oil crops, and fuel rapid area expansion across major oil-producing states. Consequently, we estimate that productivity is going be better over the last couple of years, which subsequently will reflect in higher income for farmers, who have matured plantations,” he said.

ARTICLE 73
TITLE: Indonesia's ban on palm oil exports a concern but impact to be transitory: FMCG industry
URL: https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/industry/cons-products/fmcg/indonesias-ban-on-palm-oil-exports-a-concern-but-impact-to-be-transitory-fmcg-industry/articleshow/91234387.cms

Several industry leaders hint that they will reduce their reliance on palm oil in phases and shift to alternatives such as rice bran oil and cottonseed oil for food products.
Last week Indonesia, the world's largest palm oil producer, banned shipments of crude palm oil (CPO), adding to the previous sanctions on refined oil, to soften the prices in its domestic market.
However, the Indian industry and experts expect the impact of this will be transitory in nature as Indonesia consumes only around one-third of its palm oil output.
India Ratings and Research (Ind-Ra) "believes that the ban is unlikely to sustain for a long duration, given that Indonesia consumes less than 40 per cent of its total palm oil production, resulting in the impact being transitory".
According to him, the ban is expected to stay for a short period and there should not be an impact on the prices as companies have enough stocks.
"However, if the ban continues for a long period then there would be challenges. The question is how long they can continue with the ban," Shah said.
Indonesia has imposed a ban on palm oil exports to increase domestic availability and check the rising prices of the commodity in that country. Some reports indicated that the ban did not apply on CPO but on refined bleached deodorised palmolein, but the government widened the scope a couple of days later to also include CPO.
Palm oil is preferred in India by the food industry as it is relatively cheaper, lasts longer and is more stable at high temperatures than other oils.
CPO is used by most of the food companies, while soap makers in India use a derivative Palm Fatty Acid Distillate (PFAD), a key input for making soaps, soap noodles etc.
Snacks making firm Bikano's chief operating officer Pankaj Agarwal said it was a point of worry for all the snack majors in India as palm oil is one of the important ingredients in our products.
However, he also suggested looking at alternatives like rice bran oil and cottonseed oil.
"Palm oil is one of the important ingredients in our products... With the given situation, we will have to look at some alternative options like rice bran oil and cottonseed oil," said Agarwal.
Last week, the largest FMCG major HUL had said it does not see any issue in procuring in terms of volumes, which it needs to produce materials whether it's PFAD or other derivatives of palm used for its business.
In a post-results call with the media, HUL CFO Ritesh Tiwari said India needs to do a lot of work to drive palm production into the country. That needs government support.
"We also keep looking for alternate materials for producing our product and reducing our reliance on palm," he added.
India imports over 90 per cent of its 22 MNT of demand, majorly in the form of CPO. Indonesia constitutes around 50 per cent of the imports, while 45 per cent of imports are from Malaysia and the rest from Thailand, Ind-Ra report said.
(Catch all the Business News, Breaking News and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)
Subscribe to The Economic Times Prime and read the ET ePaper online.
(Catch all the Business News, Breaking News and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)
Subscribe to The Economic Times Prime and read the ET ePaper online.

ARTICLE 74
TITLE: Why Indonesia's palm oil export ban has not cooled cooking oil prices
URL: https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/international/business/why-indonesias-palm-oil-export-ban-has-not-cooled-cooking-oil-prices/articleshow/91616386.cms

Despite these tough policies that have rattled edible oil markets and cost hundreds of millions of dollars in lost revenue, the price of cooking oil, a staple for Indonesian families, has not come down, hitting the approval rating of President Joko Widodo.
HOW ARE INDONESIAN AUTHORITIES TRYING TO REIN IN COOKING OIL PRICES?
Since November, authorities have unrolled a bewildering array of policy measures including subsidies, export permits and a palm oil levy as well as export bans. Still, that has failed to bring the cost of the household necessity made from palm oil and used by most people in the world's fourth most populous country in line with a government target.
WHAT HAS HAPPENED TO COOKING OIL PRICES?
Indonesian officials have pledged to remove the export ban once bulk cooking oil prices return to 14,000 rupiah ($0.9560) a litre across the nation. The cooking oil price has come off its highs, but trade ministry data showed as of Friday that cooking oil averaged 17,300 rupiah per litre, down from an average of 18,000 rupiah in April but up from 13,300 rupiah in July.
INDONESIAN MINISTER BLAMES A "PALM OIL MAFIA"
Muhammad Lutfi on March 18 blamed a "palm oil mafia" for exploiting the situation. Sending a chill through one of Indonesia's main export sectors, the attorney general launched a corruption investigation over palm oil export permitting, arresting a senior trade ministry official and three palm oil executives.
WHAT IS HINDERING COOKING OIL DISTRIBUTION?
Bulog said the regulations were needed to avoid any misstep in implementation and to ensure clarity on how costs would be covered.
RED TAPE SEEN AS ANOTHER FACTOR UNDERMINING POLICIES
Gulat Manurung, chairman of the smallholders farmers group APKASINDO, blames a complicated government bureaucracy for stalling efforts to subsidise palm oil.
The government is setting aside a subsidy to pay producers for any gap between production costs and selling prices.
But for palm refiners to be paid by Indonesia's palm oil fund agency BPDPKS, a highly detailed list of distributors and retailers must be provided, subject to a state audit and with any errors potentially punishable by jail time.
"The factories have the cooking oil, but they are not selling to consumers," said Gulat, who believes the system should be streamlined.
HOW DO AUTHORITIES SAY THEY ARE TRYING TO IMPROVE DISTRIBUTION?
The trade ministry on Tuesday announced a programme aimed at ensuring cheap cooking oil reaches low income households in thousands of locations. The statement said retailers would be able to sell bulk cooking oil at 14,000 rupiah per litre to people who provide them with identity cards.
Asked about distribution issues, industry ministry official Merrijantij Punguan Pintaria said there were many components but logistics and transport limitations were key obstacles.
WHAT WILL THE ENDGAME BE?
Jokowi, as the president is popularly known, has said the need for affordable food trumped revenue concerns and the export ban would be lifted only after domestic needs were met. Palm oil traders have speculated the ban could be at least partially lifted soon, particularly with storage tanks filling up.
Politics is likely to play a key part in the timing. A survey this week by pollster Indikator Politik Indonesia showed the president's approval rating is at a six-year low, largely tied to the rising cost of cooking oil and knock-on inflationary effects.

ARTICLE 75
TITLE: Indonesian farmers stage protests against palm oil export ban - Times of India
URL: https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/world/rest-of-world/indonesian-farmers-stage-protests-against-palm-oil-export-ban/articleshow/91608348.cms

JAKARTA: Hundreds of Indonesian smallholder farmers on Tuesday staged a protest in the capital Jakarta and in other parts of the world's fourth most populous country, demanding the government end a palm oil export ban that has slashed their income.
Indonesia, the world's top palm oil exporter, has since April 28 halted shipments of crude palm oil and some of its derivative products in a bid to control soaring prices of domestic cooking oil, rattling global vegetable oil markets.
 Marching alongside a truck filled with palm oil fruit, farmers held a rally outside the offices of the Coordinating Ministry of Economic Affairs, which is leading the government policy.
 "Malaysian farmers are wearing full smiles, Indonesian farmers suffer," one of the signs held up by protesters read. Malaysia is the second-largest producer of palm oil and has said it aims to supply markets left open by Indonesia's export ban.
 In a statement, the smallholder farmer's group APKASINDO said since the announcement of the export ban the price of palm fruit had dropped 70% below the floor price set by regional authorities.
 Meanwhile, APKASINDO estimated that at least 25% of palm oil mills has stopped buying palm fruit from independent farmers.
 The protesters also planned to march to the presidential palace, the group said. Similar protests were also being held in 22 other provinces, it said.
 Indonesian President Joko Widodo imposed the export ban on palm oil and its derivative products used in the making of cooking oil after a series of policies failed to control the price of the basic household food item.
 A survey this week showed the approval ratings for Jokowi, as the president is popularly known, hit the lowest level since December 2015 due to rising prices. Figures released by pollster Indikator Politik Indonesia showed that satisfaction with Jokowi fell to 58.1% in May to the lowest since December 2015 when the president's approval rating had slumped to 53%.
 Chief Economics Minister Airlangga Hartarto has said the ban would stay in place until bulk cooking oil prices drop to 14,000 rupiah ($0.9563) per litre across Indonesia.
 Trade Ministry data showed as of Friday, bulk cooking oil was priced on average at 17,300 rupiah per litre as of Friday.

ARTICLE 76
TITLE: Why Indonesia's palm oil export ban has not cooled cooking oil prices | Stock Market News
URL: https://www.livemint.com/market/commodities/why-indonesia-s-palm-oil-export-ban-has-not-cooled-cooking-oil-prices-11652783920048.html

Indonesia, the world's biggest palm oil exporter, has since April 28 halted shipments of the edible oil in a bid to flood the domestic market with supplies to control the soaring prices of cooking oil.
Despite these tough policies that have rattled edible oil markets and cost hundreds of millions of dollars in lost revenue, the price of cooking oil, a staple for Indonesian families, has not come down, hitting the approval rating of President Joko Widodo.
HOW ARE INDONESIAN AUTHORITIES TRYING TO REIN IN COOKING OIL PRICES?
Since November, authorities have unrolled a bewildering array of policy measures including subsidies, export permits and a palm oil levy as well as export bans. Still, that has failed to bring the cost of the household necessity made from palm oil and used by most people in the world's fourth most populous country in line with a government target.
WHAT HAS HAPPENED TO COOKING OIL PRICES?
Indonesian officials have pledged to remove the export ban once bulk cooking oil prices return to 14,000 rupiah ($0.9560) a litre across the nation. The cooking oil price has come off its highs, but trade ministry data showed as of Friday that cooking oil averaged 17,300 rupiah per litre, down from an average of 18,000 rupiah in April but up from 13,300 rupiah in July.
INDONESIAN MINISTER BLAMES A "PALM OIL MAFIA"
Trade Minister Muhammad Lutfi on March 18 blamed a "palm oil mafia" for exploiting the situation. Sending a chill through one of Indonesia's main export sectors, the attorney general launched a corruption investigation over palm oil export permitting, arresting a senior trade ministry official and three palm oil executives.
WHAT IS HINDERING COOKING OIL DISTRIBUTION?
Government efforts to bring down prices include getting state food procurement agency, Bulog, to distribute more cooking oil. But last week Bulog said a regulatory framework was not yet in place, meaning a plan to distribute subsidised cooking oil at the 14,000 rupiah price had not started yet.
Bulog said the regulations were needed to avoid any misstep in implementation and to ensure clarity on how costs would be covered.
RED TAPE SEEN AS ANOTHER FACTOR UNDERMINING POLICIES
Gulat Manurung, chairman of the smallholders farmers group APKASINDO, blames a complicated government bureaucracy for stalling efforts to subsidise palm oil.
The government is setting aside a subsidy to pay producers for any gap between production costs and selling prices.
But for palm refiners to be paid by Indonesia's palm oil fund agency BPDPKS, a highly detailed list of distributors and retailers must be provided, subject to a state audit and with any errors potentially punishable by jail time.
"The factories have the cooking oil, but they are not selling to consumers," said Gulat, who believes the system should be streamlined.
HOW DO AUTHORITIES SAY THEY ARE TRYING TO IMPROVE DISTRIBUTION?
The trade ministry on Tuesday announced a programme aimed at ensuring cheap cooking oil reaches low income households in thousands of locations. The statement said retailers would be able to sell bulk cooking oil at 14,000 rupiah per litre to people who provide them with identity cards.
Asked about distribution issues, industry ministry official Merrijantij Punguan Pintaria said there were many components but logistics and transport limitations were key obstacles.
WHAT WILL THE ENDGAME BE?
Jokowi, as the president is popularly known, has said the need for affordable food trumped revenue concerns and the export ban would be lifted only after domestic needs were met. Palm oil traders have speculated the ban could be at least partially lifted soon, particularly with storage tanks filling up.
Politics is likely to play a key part in the timing. A survey this week by pollster Indikator Politik Indonesia showed the president's approval rating is at a six-year low, largely tied to the rising cost of cooking oil and knock-on inflationary effects.

ARTICLE 77
TITLE: Indonesia to lift palm oil export ban from Monday: President Joko Widodo
URL: https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/international/world-news/indonesia-to-lift-palm-oil-export-ban-from-monday-president/articleshow/91663224.cms

Related
The decision to lift the ban was taken despite the price of bulk cooking oil having not yet reached the targeted 14,000 rupiah per litre price, as the government considers the welfare of 17 million workers in the palm oil industry, the president said in a video statement, news agency Reuters reported.
Indonesia, the world's biggest palm oil exporter, has since April 28 halted shipments of edible oil in a bid to flood the domestic market with supplies to control the soaring prices of cooking oil.
Reports had suggested that despite the tough policies that have rattled edible oil markets and cost hundreds of millions of dollars in lost revenue, the price of cooking oil, a staple for Indonesian families, has not come down, hitting the approval rating of President Joko Widodo.
Jokowi, as the president is popularly known, had said the need for affordable food trumped revenue concerns and the export ban would be lifted only after domestic needs were met.

ARTICLE 78
TITLE: Indonesia to lift palm oil export ban from Monday, president says
URL: https://indianexpress.com/article/world/indonesia-to-lift-palm-oil-export-ban-from-monday-president-says-7925970/

Indonesia will lift its palm oil export ban from Monday, following improvements in the domestic cooking oil supply situation, President Joko Widodo said on Thursday.
The world’s top palm oil exporter has since April 28 halted shipments of crude palm oil (CPO) and some derivative products to try to tame soaring prices of domestic cooking oil.
The decision comes despite bulk cooking oil having not yet receded to the targeted 14,000 rupiah per litre price, as the government considers the welfare of 17 million workers in the palm oil industry, the president said in a video statement.
Jokowi, as the president is known, said the supply of bulk cooking oil has now reached a level greater than what the domestic market needed.
“Average price of (bulk) cooking oil before the export ban in April was 19,800 rupiah per litre and after the ban the average price dropped to around 17,200 to 17,600 rupiah per litre,” he said.
Indonesia came up with the ban on exports of the widely used vegetable oil as a means of controlling domestic prices, but pressures have been mounting for it to be eased as farmers protested that there were no demand for their palm fruits.
The ban has rattled global vegetable oil markets that were already struggling after the war in Ukraine removed a big chunk of sunflower oil supply.
Palm oil makes up more than a third of the world’s vegetable oil market, with Indonesia accounting for about 60% of palm oil supply.

ARTICLE 79
TITLE: Indonesia Palm Oil Export Ban: Indonesia to lift palm oil export ban from Monday, president says | International Business News - Times of India
URL: https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/business/india-business/indonesia-to-lift-palm-oil-export-ban-from-monday-president-says/articleshow/91664918.cms

JAKARTA: Indonesia will lift its palm oil export ban from Monday, following improvements in the domestic cooking oil supply situation, President Joko Widodo said on Thursday.
The world's top palm oil exporter has since April 28 halted shipments of crude palm oil (CPO) and some derivative products to try to tame soaring prices of domestic cooking oil.
The decision comes despite bulk cooking oil having not yet receded to the targeted 14,000 rupiah per litre price, as the government considers the welfare of 17 million workers in the palm oil industry, the president said in a video statement.
Jokowi, as the president is known, said the supply of bulk cooking oil has now reached a level greater than what the domestic market needed.
"Average price of (bulk) cooking oil before the export ban in April was 19,800 rupiah per litre and after the ban the average price dropped to around 17,200 to 17,600 rupiah per litre," he said.
Indonesia came up with the ban on exports of the widely used vegetable oil as a means of controlling domestic prices, but pressures have been mounting for it to be eased as farmers protested that there were no demand for their palm fruits.
The ban has rattled global vegetable oil markets that were already struggling after the war in Ukraine removed a big chunk of sunflower oil supply.
Palm oil makes up more than a third of the world's vegetable oil market, with Indonesia accounting for about 60% of palm oil supply.

ARTICLE 80
TITLE: Indonesia Palm Oil Export Ban: Indonesia to lift palm oil export ban from Monday, president says | International Business News - Times of India
URL: https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/business/international-business/indonesia-to-lift-palm-oil-export-ban-from-monday-president-says/articleshow/91664918.cms

JAKARTA: Indonesia will lift its palm oil export ban from Monday, following improvements in the domestic cooking oil supply situation, President Joko Widodo said on Thursday.
The world's top palm oil exporter has since April 28 halted shipments of crude palm oil (CPO) and some derivative products to try to tame soaring prices of domestic cooking oil.
The decision comes despite bulk cooking oil having not yet receded to the targeted 14,000 rupiah per litre price, as the government considers the welfare of 17 million workers in the palm oil industry, the president said in a video statement.
Jokowi, as the president is known, said the supply of bulk cooking oil has now reached a level greater than what the domestic market needed.
"Average price of (bulk) cooking oil before the export ban in April was 19,800 rupiah per litre and after the ban the average price dropped to around 17,200 to 17,600 rupiah per litre," he said.
Indonesia came up with the ban on exports of the widely used vegetable oil as a means of controlling domestic prices, but pressures have been mounting for it to be eased as farmers protested that there were no demand for their palm fruits.
The ban has rattled global vegetable oil markets that were already struggling after the war in Ukraine removed a big chunk of sunflower oil supply.
Palm oil makes up more than a third of the world's vegetable oil market, with Indonesia accounting for about 60% of palm oil supply.

ARTICLE 81
TITLE: Indonesia to lift palm oil export ban from Monday, says president - BusinessToday
URL: https://www.businesstoday.in/latest/world/story/indonesia-to-lift-palm-oil-export-ban-from-monday-says-president-334255-2022-05-19?utm_source=rssfeed

Indonesia will lift its palm oil export ban from Monday, following improvements in the domestic cooking oil supply situation, President Joko Widodo said on Thursday.
The world's top palm oil exporter has since April 28 halted shipments of crude palm oil (CPO) and some derivative products to try to tame soaring prices of domestic cooking oil.
The decision comes despite bulk cooking oil having not yet receded to the targeted 14,000 rupiah per litre price, as the government considers the welfare of 17 million workers in the palm oil industry, the president said in a video statement.
Jokowi, as the president is known, said the supply of bulk cooking oil has now reached a level greater than what the domestic market needed.
"Average price of (bulk) cooking oil before the export ban in April was 19,800 rupiah per litre and after the ban the average price dropped to around 17,200 to 17,600 rupiah per litre," he said.
Indonesia came up with the ban on exports of the widely used vegetable oil as a means of controlling domestic prices, but pressures have been mounting for it to be eased as farmers protested that there were no demand for their palm fruits.
The ban has rattled global vegetable oil markets that were already struggling after the war in Ukraine removed a big chunk of sunflower oil supply.
Palm oil makes up more than a third of the world's vegetable oil market, with Indonesia accounting for about 60% of palm oil supply.
Also Read: Reaffirms Tata Group's position: Firm after SC order on Cyrus Mistry review plea
Also Read: Location AI start-up GeoIQ raises $2.25 million from Lenskart, ESV, others

ARTICLE 82
TITLE: Indonesia lifts ban on cooking oil export as supply improves
URL: https://www.financialexpress.com/market/commodities/indonesia-lifts-ban-on-cooking-oil-export-as-supply-improves/2531309/

Indonesia said Thursday it will lift a monthlong ban on palm oil export, citing improvements in the supply and domestic price of bulk cooking oil.
President Joko Widodo said exports will resume on Monday.
Indonesia and Malaysia are the world’s largest exporters of palm oil, which plays an important role in their economies. They account for 85per cent of global palm oil production.
Pressure on the global supply of cooking oil has increased because of the war in Ukraine, which accounts for nearly half of the world’s sunflower oil on top of the 25per cent from Russia.
Palm oil prices went up 200per cent or higher after Indonesia banned the export of cooking oil and its raw materials to reduce local shortages and hold down skyrocketing prices.
Widodo said in a news conference that his government was planning to lift the ban if the price of bulk cooking oil reached 14,000 rupiah ($0.96) per liter. He said it still has not reached the target but he expects it to drop further in the next few weeks as more palm oil becomes available.
“Based on the current supply and price of cooking oil and considering that there are 17 million workers in the palm oil industry, both working farmers and other supporting staff, I have decided that the export of cooking oil will reopen on Monday, May 23,” Widodo said.
He said that the national demand for bulk cooking oil is approximately 194,000 tons per month. Before the export ban, the supply reached 64,500 tons, and since then, it more than tripled to over 211,000 tons per month.
He said that law enforcement agencies are investigating allegations of violations and fraud in the distribution and production of cooking oil.

ARTICLE 83
TITLE: Indonesia Lifts Palm Oil Export Ban From May 23 As Domestic Cooking Oil Supply Situation Improves
URL: https://www.india.com/business/breaking-indonesia-lifts-palm-oil-export-ban-from-may-23-as-domestic-cooking-oil-supply-situation-improves-5401494/

Jakarta: Indonesia President Joko Widodo on Thursday announced that the country will lift its palm oil export ban from Monday, May 23, following improvements in the domestic cooking oil supply situation. In a video statement, President Joko Widodo said the decision to lift the ban on plan oil export was taken despite the price of bulk cooking oil having not yet reached the targeted 14,000 rupiah per litre price as the government considers the welfare of 17 million workers in the palm oil industry.
Being the world’s top palm oil exporter, Indonesia had on 28 April halted the shipments of crude palm oil and some of its derivative products to control soaring prices of domestic cooking oil, rattling global vegetable oil markets.
President Joko Widodo said in the statement that the supply of bulk cooking oil has now reached a level greater than what the domestic market needed.
“Average price of (bulk) cooking oil before the export ban in April was 19,800 rupiah per litre and after the ban the average price dropped to around 17,200 to 17,600 rupiah per litre,” he said in the statement.
In the recent past, several smallholder farmers staged a protest in Jakarta and in other parts of the country, demanding the government to end the palm oil export ban that has slashed their incomes.
The agitating farmers’ group APKASINDO had in a statement said since the export ban , the price of palm fruit has dropped 70% below a floor price set by regional authorities.
The independent farmers are not protected by the floor price, which is fixed through an agreement between mills and large-scale cooperatives.

ARTICLE 84
TITLE: Indonesia to lift palm oil export ban from Monday | Stock Market News
URL: https://www.livemint.com/market/commodities/indonesia-to-lift-palm-oil-export-ban-from-monday-president-joko-widodo-11652955600773.html

The decision to lift the ban was taken despite the price of bulk cooking oil having not yet reached the targeted 14,000 rupiah per litre price, as the government considers the welfare of 17 million workers in the palm oil industry, the president said
Agencies
Updated19 May 2022, 03:59 PM IST
Indonesia will lift its palm oil export ban from 23 May, following improvements in the domestic cooking oil supply situation, President Joko Widodo announced on Thursday.
The decision to lift the ban was taken despite the price of bulk cooking oil having not yet reached the targeted 14,000 rupiah per litre price, as the government considers the welfare of 17 million workers in the palm oil industry, the president said in a video statement.
Indonesia, the world's top palm oil exporter, on 28 April halted shipments of crude palm oil and some of its derivative products to control soaring prices of domestic cooking oil, rattling global vegetable oil markets.
Hundreds of Indonesian smallholder farmers staged a protest in the capital Jakarta and in other parts of the country, demanding the government end a palm oil export ban that has slashed their incomes.
The export ban, designed to cool the domestic price of cooking oil, has caused “economic hardship” for some 16 million farmers as the low fruit prices no longer cover costs, said Gulat Manurung, chairman of the Indonesian Oil Palm Farmers Association.
Cooking oil has stayed stubbornly above the official guidance of 14,000 rupiah (96 cents) a liter in spite of the ban.
In a statement, the smallholder farmers' group APKASINDO said since the export ban the price of palm fruit had dropped 70% below a floor price set by regional authorities.
Independent farmers are not protected by the floor price, which is fixed through an agreement between mills and large-scale cooperatives.
APKASINDO estimates at least 25% of palm oil mills have stopped buying palm fruit from independent farmers since the ban started, indicating storage tanks are filling up at mills.

ARTICLE 85
TITLE: Indonesia lifts palm oil export ban from May 23 as domestic cooking oil supply situation improves | India News | Zee News
URL: https://zeenews.india.com/india/indonesia-lifts-palm-oil-export-ban-from-may-23-as-domestic-cooking-oil-supply-situation-improves-2465243.html

Indonesian President Joko Widodo on Thursday announced to lift its palm oil export ban from May 23 as the domestic cooking oil supply situation in the country has improved. Widodo said the decision to lift the ban on plan oil export was taken despite the price of bulk cooking oil having not yet reached the targeted 14,000 rupiah per litre price as the government considers the welfare of 17 million workers in the palm oil industry. Indonesia, the world’s top palm oil exporter, had on 28 April halted the shipments of crude palm oil and some of its derivative products to control rising prices of domestic cooking oil, rattling global vegetable oil markets.
“Average price of (bulk) cooking oil before the export ban in April was 19,800 rupiah per litre and after the ban the average price dropped to around 17,200 to 17,600 rupiah per litre,” he said in a statement. (With agency inputs)
Stay informed on all the latest news, real-time breaking news updates, and follow all the important headlines in india news and world news on Zee News.

ARTICLE 86
TITLE: India's palm oil imports seen muted even as Indonesia lifts export ban
URL: https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/economy/foreign-trade/indias-palm-oil-imports-seen-muted-even-as-indonesia-lifts-export-ban/articleshow/91685295.cms

Lower-than-normal imports by India, the world's biggest palm oil buyer, could weigh on Malaysian palm oil prices, but could lift soyoil shipments from Argentina, Brazil and the United States, supporting Chicago soyoil prices.
"Indians are not rushing to buy as prices have jumped because of Indonesia's export restriction," said Sandeep Bajoria, chief executive of Sunvin Group, a vegetable oil brokerage and consultancy firm.
Indonesia will reimpose a domestic sales requirement on palm oil, its government said on Friday, a day after the world's biggest producer of the key edible oil reversed a ban on its export.
Soyoil's premium over palm oil for India buyers have narrowed to just $70 per tonne, dealers said.
India's palm oil imports could rise to 550,000 tonnes in June, dealers said. India on an average imports 700,000 tonnes of palm oil a month.
Limited availability of palm oil and sunflower oil prompted refiners to increase soyoil buying from Argentina, Brazil and United States for prompt shipments, said a New Delhi-based dealer with a global trading firm.
India's soyoil imports in May could rise to 450,000 tonnes from 273,151 tonnes in April, dealers said.
In June, soyoil imports could rise to about 480,000 tonnes, they said.

ARTICLE 87
TITLE: India's palm oil imports seen muted even as Indonesia lifts export ban - Times of India
URL: https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/business/india-business/indias-palm-oil-imports-seen-muted-even-as-indonesia-lifts-export-ban/articleshow/91685317.cms

MUMBAI: India's palm oil imports in June are unlikely to spike despite Indonesia's decision to lift its ban on overseas shipments as a rally in palm oil prices has made rival soyoil more attractive for refiners, five dealers told Reuters on Friday.
 Lower-than-normal imports by India, the world's biggest palm oil buyer, could weigh on Malaysian palm oil prices, but could lift soyoil shipments from Argentina, Brazil and the United States, supporting Chicago soyoil prices.
 "Indians are not rushing to buy as prices have jumped because of Indonesia's export restriction," said Sandeep Bajoria, chief executive of Sunvin Group, a vegetable oil brokerage and consultancy firm.
 Indonesia will reimpose a domestic sales requirement on palm oil, its government said on Friday, a day after the world's biggest producer of the key edible oil reversed a ban on its export.
 Soyoil's premium over palm oil for India buyers have narrowed to just $70 per tonne, dealers said.
 Crude palm oil was being offered in India at about $1,750 a tonne, including cost, insurance and freight (CIF), for June shipments, compared with $1,820 for crude soybean oil. A month ago, palm oil was trading at a discount of more than $150 per tonne to soyoil.
 India's palm oil imports in May could fall to about 500,000 tonnes from 572,508 tonnes a month ago, dealers said.
 "In June, imports will rise since Indonesia has allowed exports, but there won't be a massive jump. Palm prices are not very attractive," said a Mumbai-based dealer with a global trading firm.
 India's palm oil imports could rise to 550,000 tonnes in June, dealers said. India on an average imports 700,000 tonnes of palm oil a month.
 Limited availability of palm oil and sunflower oil prompted refiners to increase soyoil buying from Argentina, Brazil and United States for prompt shipments, said a New Delhi-based dealer with a global trading firm.
 India's soyoil imports in May could rise to 450,000 tonnes from 273,151 tonnes in April, dealers said.
 In June, soyoil imports could rise to about 480,000 tonnes, they said.

ARTICLE 88
TITLE: Indonesia to reimpose local palm oil sales rule as it ends export ban - BusinessToday
URL: https://www.businesstoday.in/latest/policy/story/indonesia-to-reimpose-local-palm-oil-sales-rule-as-it-ends-export-ban-334387-2022-05-20?utm_source=rssfeed

Indonesia will reimpose a domestic sales requirement on palm oil, the government said on Friday, a day after the world's biggest producer of the key edible oil reversed a ban on its export.
President Joko Widodo's government has made several reversals on palm oil policy since November. The late-April export ban, an attempt to control high domestic cooking oil prices, shocking global edible oil markets and angered farmers as their product prices fell. Palm oil, used in everything from margarine to shampoo, comprises a third of the world's vegetable oil market, with Indonesia accounting for about 60% of the supply.
Jokowi, as the president is popularly known, said on Thursday the three-week-old ban would end next week, even though the price of bulk cooking oil remains well above the government's target of 14,000 rupiahs (96 U.S. cents) per liter. Economy minister Airlangga Hartarto said on Friday the government will impose a Domestic Market Obligation (DMO) on palm oil to ensure 10 million tonnes of cooking oil remains at home.
"The trade ministry will determine the size of the DMO that must be met by each producer and the mechanism to produce and distribute cooking oil to the communities," the coordinating minister for economic affairs told a virtual briefing. The state food procurement agency Bulog will be assigned to set up a cooking oil buffer stock, he said. Jokowi, in announcing the resumption of exports, said he expected cooking oil prices to ease toward the intended target and vowed authorities would closely monitor supplies.
The government had imposed a DMO of 20% of companies' planned exports in January, raising that to 30% in March before scrapping it in favor of higher export levies. PALM OIL FUTURES REBOUND
Airlangga said the ban has helped lift the monthly cooking oil stock to 109% of monthly demand from 33% in March, and lower the average price of bulk cooking oil from 19,800 rupiahs to 17,000 rupiahs per liter as of Thursday. "These factors suggest that ... the issues that preceded the ban have yet to be fully resolved, including distribution and hoarding, which have been cited as contributing to soaring domestic cooking oil prices," Nomura economists said.
Maybank analyst Ong Chee Ting said international crude palm oil prices (CPO) were expected to soften after the decision to lift the ban. "As for international buyers, the availability of Indonesian palm oil will somewhat pressure international CPO prices. Overall, the lifting of the export ban is a relief to Indonesian-based growers," Ong said in a note.
Indonesian farmers had staged protests against the export ban earlier this week. The domestic price of palm fruits had tumbled by around 70% since the ban, Gulati Manurung, chairman of the Indonesian smallholder's group APKASINDO, said in a statement, welcoming the move to reopen exports.
"The export ban has shown Indonesia how important palm oil is for the country," Gulati said. Farmers and industry groups were relieved by the ban's easing. The Indonesia Palm Oil Association expects that with abundant output at home there should be no problem in fulfilling the DMO, secretary-general Eddy Martono said.
Malaysian benchmark palm oil contracts initially fell about 2% but rebounded to gain more than 3% as the market digested the DMO news. Indonesia's rupiah currency strengthened by 0.47% and the Jakarta stock index gained about 1.75%.
($1 = 14,660.0000 rupiah)

ARTICLE 89
TITLE: Edible oil prices to come down as Indonesia lifts export ban
URL: https://www.financialexpress.com/market/commodities/edible-oil-prices-to-come-down-as-indonesia-lifts-export-ban/2531601/

Indonesia on Thursday decided to lift a three-weeks-old ban on palm oil exports effective next Monday, a move that would ease domestic supplies of the widely used edible oil and softening of its prices.
Domestic edible oil prices have increased by more than 30% in the last one year, taking cue from global elevated prices due to shortfall in production. Rise in edible oil prices have, in recent months, been a significant driver of retail food inflation, which stood at 8.38% in April, higher than headline inflation of 7.79%.
India imports about 55% of its annual edible oil consumption. Annual imports of edible oil is around 13 million tonne (MT), mostly palm oil (8 MT), soyabean and sunflower. Palm oil imports are from Malaysia and Indonesia.
Quoting President Joko Widodo, Reuters reported that Indonesia will lift its palm oil export ban following improvements in the domestic cooking oil supply situation.
The decision to lift the ban was taken despite the price of bulk cooking oil having not yet reached the targeted 14,000 Indonesian rupiah ($0.96) per litre, as the government considers the welfare of 17 million workers in the palm oil industry, Widodo said in a video statement.
Indonesia, the largest global exporter of palm oil, had banned exports from April 28, 2022 to curb the spike in domestic cooking oil prices. The ban on exports comes at a time when, because of the Russia-Ukraine conflict, a chunk of sunflower supply was also disrupted.
While stating that India has optimum stock of edible oil, the government, in a statement earlier this month, had stated that around 2.1 MT was the current stock while 1.2 MT of edible is in transit. “The country has sufficient money to cover the lean period due to the ban on export by Indonesia,” it stated.
Global prices of edible oils are under pressure due to a shortfall in global production and increase in export tax and levies by the exporting countries, an official statement had stated.
Because of around 30% rise in prices of edible oil (mustard) in the domestic market in the last one year, inflation was 23.09% in April 2022, while inflation in refined oil (sunflower, soyabean and palm) was 19.84% because of a rise in global prices of edible oil, pushing up domestic prices.
To put a curb on rising prices of edible oil, the government had abolished the basic import duty on crude edible oil till September 30, 2022. The current effective duty on crude palm oil, crude soyabean and sunflower oil stands at 5.50% till December 31, 2022.
The rate of import duties on refined palm oil (12.5%), refined soyabean oil and refined sunflower oil (17.5%) are till September 30, 2022.
“We were anticipating the palm oil ban to be lifted soon as Indonesia is an export dependent country,” said BV Mehta, executive director, Solvent Extractors’ Association of India.

ARTICLE 90
TITLE: Cooking oil prices to cool as Indonesia lifts export ban | Today News
URL: https://www.livemint.com/news/india/cooking-oil-prices-to-cool-as-indonesia-lifts-export-ban-11652990758378.html

Cooking oil prices in the domestic market are set to soften after Indonesia, the world’s largest producer of palm oil, Thursday decided to lift its export ban from next week. A prolonged ban would have doubled prices as India is the largest importer of palm oil from the Southeast Asian country.
A commerce ministry official said Indonesia ran out of storage capacity in less than a month after announcing a sudden export ban on 28 April. “This was the chief reason they have lifted the export ban,” he added.
India imports about 8 million tonnes of palm oil annually and the commodity accounts for nearly a 40% share of its overall edible oil consumption basket. Indonesia accounts for nearly 48 million tonne (mt) of palm oil out of the 75 mt produced globally every year and it is the country’s leading source of revenue.
“Indonesia’s domestic consumption of palm oil is much less than their production, so this decision was on the cards. But it has come much earlier than we expected. It will soften the prices and check food inflation that has jumped sharply,” Federation of Indian Export Organisations (FIEO) Director General Ajay Sahai said in an interview.
India is in the midst of record-high retail inflation driven by rising prices of food and fuel. Food inflation in April soared to 8.38% from 7.68% in March.
Indonesian President Joko Widodo said the supply of bulk cooking oil surpassed optimum levels and would help ease the prices of cooking oil in Indonesia. “In several regions, I know prices of cooking oil are still relatively high, but I believe in the coming weeks, they will be more affordable,” Reuters quoted Widodo as saying earlier in the day.
The announcement came a month after Indonesian lawmakers urged the government to review the ban due to its adverse impact on farmers and labourers involved in producing palm oil.
Palm oil imports from Indonesia are of special significance to India as palm oil and its derivatives are used in the production of several household goods such as soaps, shampoos, biscuits and noodles.

ARTICLE 91
TITLE: Indonesia to lift palm oil export ban, likely giving India 'big relief'
URL: https://www.rediff.com/business/report/indonesia-to-lift-palm-oil-export-ban-likely-giving-india-big-relief/20220520.htm

Indonesia, the world’s biggest supplier of palm oil, said on Thursday it will lift a ban on exports from Monday, likely helping India and other importers.
India annually imports around 13-13.5 million tonne of edible oils, of which around 8-8.5 million tonnes (around 63 per cent) is palm oil.
Of this, 8-8.5 million tonnes of palm oil, 45-50 per cent comes from Indonesia and the rest from neighboring Malaysia.
The decision will go despite bulk cooking oil having not yet receded to the targeted 14,000 rupiahs per litre price, as the government considers the welfare of 17 million workers in the palm oil industry, Indonesian President Joko Widodo said in a video statement, agencies reported.
Jokowi, as the president is known, said the supply of bulk cooking oil has now reached a level greater than what the domestic market needed.
“Average price of (bulk) cooking oil before the export ban in April was 19,800 rupiah per litre and after the ban the average price dropped to around 17,200 to 17,600 rupiah per litre," he said.
Indonesia’s ban, imposed April 28, was one of the biggest acts of crop protectionism since Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in February and it stymied exports of sunflower oil and worsened a global shortage.
Palm oil is used in everything from food to soap to fuel, and the move by Indonesia threatened to push up costs even more across multiple supply chains at a time of rampant inflation.
“This should come as a big relief to India and there will surely be a price correction.
"But, how much is difficult to say because while the ban was in place we had started living without Indonesia and increased our sourcing of palm oil from neighbouring Malaysia and Thailand,” Atul Chaturvedi, president of Solvent Extractors Association (SEA) of India, told Business Standard.
Chaturvedi said that prices will soften also because in summers usually demand for edible oil goes down as consumption of fried foods is less.
On a monthly basis, since April 2022, around 300,000-325,000 tonnes of palm oil that came from Indonesia completely stopped, which was fulfilled by Malaysia and Thailand.
This increased prices as before that a monthly supply of around 200,000-225,000 tonnes of sunflower oil from Ukraine was disrupted due to the war.
However, the saving grace was the adequate pipeline stocks of around 2.1 million tonnes of edible oils that India had before the ban.
Which, coupled with the 1.2 million tonnes in transit, meant that India had around three months’ consumption secured with it.
The country imports around 1.0-1.1 million tonnes of edible oils in various forms per month.
Meanwhile, agencies reported that lifting of the ban came after hundreds of farmers rallied to protest the move, saying their incomes have suffered because prices of their fresh fruit bunches plunged.
A survey this month showed the approval ratings for Jokowi, as the president is popularly known, hit the lowest in more than six years due to Indonesians’ growing discontentment over rising prices.
Soybean oil, a substitute of palm, fell as much as 1.6 per cent after Indonesia’s announcement.
Palm oil futures earlier closed 1 per cent lower in Kuala Lumpur.
Indonesia's Palm Oil Association appreciated the government's decision to lift the export ban from May 23, as storage tanks were reaching full capacity, secretary general Eddy Martono said.

ARTICLE 92
TITLE: Consumers expected to get relief from high cooking oil prices as Indonesia lifts export ban on palm oil
URL: https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/industry/cons-products/food/consumers-expected-to-get-relief-from-high-cooking-oil-prices-as-indonesia-lifts-export-ban-on-palm-oil/articleshow/91704754.cms

Related
- Cooking oil prices to fall with Indonesia set to lift export ban
- India's palm oil imports seen muted even as Indonesia lifts export ban
- Unfair to blame wheat inflation on export curbs: India to WTO
- China quietly increases purchases of low-priced Russian oil
- China's coking coal imports from Russia touch record high in April
Supplies of sunflower oil from Ukraine are also expected to improve as the Russia-Ukraine war stabilises, said traders.
The lifting of the export ban will help increase availability of edible oil. Indonesia produces 46 million tonnes of palm oil a year. It consumes 9 million tonnes of this as food and another 9 million tonnes in its biodiesel programme, and exports the remaining 28 million tonnes.
"Market had come down by 5% after Indonesia announced on May 19 that it will lift the ban on export of palm oil. However, as it subsequently clarified that exporters will have to meet with domestic market obligations, prices again increased by 4% on May 20," said Sandeep Bajoria, chief executive of edible oil importer Sunvin Group.
Indonesia has asked its cooking oil industry to reserve 10 million tonnes of palm oil for domestic consumption.
India's monthly consumption of sunflower oil before the outbreak of the Russia-Ukraine war was 200,000 tonnes, which declined by half as supplies from the Black Sea region came to a standstill.
"Now that the war is stabilising, sunflower oil supplies from Ukraine are gradually picking up by small barges, railways and by road. We expect India's sunflower oil supplies to increase by another 20,000 tonnes to 25,000 tonnes per month," said Bajoria.
(Catch all the Business News, Breaking News and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)
Subscribe to The Economic Times Prime and read the ET ePaper online.
(Catch all the Business News, Breaking News and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)
Subscribe to The Economic Times Prime and read the ET ePaper online.

ARTICLE 93
TITLE: Cooking oil prices to fall with Indonesia set to lift export ban
URL: https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/industry/cons-products/food/cooking-oil-prices-to-fall-with-indonesia-set-to-lift-export-ban/articleshow/91696359.cms

Supplies of sunflower oil from Ukraine are also expected to improve as the Russia-Ukraine war stabilises, said traders.
The lifting of the export ban will help increase availability of edible oil. Indonesia produces 46 million tonnes of palm oil a year. It consumes 9 million tonnes of this as food and another 9 million tonnes in its biodiesel programme, and exports the remaining 28 million tonnes.
"Market had come down by 5% after Indonesia announced on May 19 that it will lift the ban on export of palm oil. However, as it subsequently clarified that exporters will have to meet with domestic market obligations, prices again increased by 4% on May 20," said Sandeep Bajoria, chief executive of edible oil importer Sunvin Group.
Indonesia has asked its cooking oil industry to reserve 10 million tonnes of palm oil for domestic consumption.
India's monthly consumption of sunflower oil before the outbreak of the Russia-Ukraine war was 200,000 tonnes, which declined by half as supplies from the Black Sea region came to a standstill.
"Now that the war is stabilising, sunflower oil supplies from Ukraine are gradually picking up by small barges, railways and by road. We expect India's sunflower oil supplies to increase by another 20,000 tonnes to 25,000 tonnes per month," said Bajoria.
(Catch all the Business News, Breaking News and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)
Subscribe to The Economic Times Prime and read the ET ePaper online.
(Catch all the Business News, Breaking News and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)
Subscribe to The Economic Times Prime and read the ET ePaper online.

ARTICLE 94
TITLE: Indonesia lifts ban on palm oil exports but shipments unlikely now | Here's why
URL: https://www.indiatoday.in/business/story/indonesia-lifts-ban-on-palm-oil-exports-but-shipments-unlikely-now-here-s-why-1952983-2022-05-23?utm_source=rss

Indonesia lifts ban on palm oil exports but shipments unlikely now | Here's why
Indonesia President Joko Widodo announced the lifting of the ban on exports of crude palm oil and some derivative products.
Indonesia allowed a resumption of palm oil exports from Monday after a three-week ban, but shipments were not expected to get underway until details emerge on new rules aimed at securing domestic supplies of the edible oil.
The Southeast Asian country, the world's biggest palm oil producer, halted exports of palm oil from April 28 in an attempt to bring down soaring local prices of cooking oil, rattling global edible oil markets already struggling with sunflower oil supply shortages due to the war in Ukraine.
PALM OIL EXPORT BAN
President Joko Widodo announced the lifting of the ban on exports of crude palm oil and some derivative products last week, expressing confidence that bulk cooking oil prices were heading towards a target level of 14,000 rupiah ($0.9546) per litre, even if they were currently higher in some areas.
Palm oil, used in everything from margarine to shampoo, comprises a third of the world's vegetable oil market, with Indonesia accounting for about 60 per cent of supply.
REASON
To ensure supply security, Indonesia said it will impose a so-called Domestic Market Obligation (DMO) policy, whereby producers are required to sell a portion of their products locally at a certain price level.
Indonesia plans to retain 10 million tonnes of cooking oil supplies at home under the DMO rules, Chief Economics Minister Airlangga Hartarto said, adding their implementation will be regulated by the Trade Ministry.
Traders were on Monday waiting for details on the DMO and other rules to be made public.
"Sellers are first trying to clear pending quantity that was stuck because of the ban. They are accepting new orders as well, but demand is not great," said a Mumbai-based dealer with a global trading house.
"They are also not too keen to sell a lot before understanding DMO rules," added the trader.
A Jakarta-based company, which did not want to be identified due to the sensitivity of the matter, said it was also waiting for details of the rules before embarking on shipments.
A senior trade ministry official did not respond when contacted by Reuters seeking details.
Partially reflecting the Indonesia policy uncertainty, palm oil futures from rival supplier Malaysia climbed 1.67% on Monday.
Asked whether palm oil producer Musim Mas had resumed exports, spokesperson Carolyn Lim said the company was still focused on "flooding the domestic markets with cooking oil to hopefully reach the target retail price", noting the Indonesian government was still concerned about the high retail prices.
As of Friday, the average price of bulk cooking oil was at 17,000 rupiah per litre, Trade Ministry data showed.
Some farmers, though, cheered the ending of the export ban.
Last week, farmers staged rallies across Indonesia to protest a 70% drop in prices of palm fruit as refiners stopped accepting supplies because palm oil storage filled up.
"There are no more long lines at palm oil mills," said palm oil farmer Irfan, who said palm fruit prices in his area of West Sulawesi had started to stabilise.
ALSO READ | As Jet Airways takes to skies, what will happen to your flight ticket refund?

ARTICLE 95
TITLE: Indonesia seeks to issue first palm oil export permits since ban - BusinessToday
URL: https://www.businesstoday.in/latest/world/story/indonesia-seeks-to-issue-first-palm-oil-export-permits-since-ban-335673-2022-05-30?utm_source=rssfeed

Indonesia has received its first requests for palm oil export permits following the lifting of a ban a week ago, some of which could be granted on Monday, a senior official said, signaling a calibrated resumption of shipments amid protracted delays.
Though Indonesia, the world's top palm oil producer, has officially allowed exports to restart after a three-week halt, companies are facing regulatory hurdles that are slowing the process of getting their shipments out.
"As of this morning there were five to six companies that had submitted a request and the system would immediately process them. We hope the permits can be issued today," Veri Anggriono, a senior trade ministry official said.
Indonesia is requiring firms to reserve a share of their palm oil exports for the local market under a Domestic Market Obligation (DMO) and to join a bulk cooking oil programme designed to maintain domestic supplies and keep runaway prices in check.
The government has targeted shipments of 1 million tonnes of palm oil exports over an undisclosed time period, based on companies' domestic sales under the programme. That would be less than half of the typical monthly volume prior to the ban.
The volume companies are allowed to export would depend on their refining capacity and the domestic cooking oil demand, according to regulations.
Veri said the ratio of the exports allocation and the domestic distribution puts the DMO at around 20%.
SLOW RESTART
As of Sunday, 75 palm oil producers were registered for the bulk cooking oil programme, a senior industry ministry official told media on Monday.
Eddy Martono, secretary general of the Indonesia Palm Oil Association (GAPKI), said he hoped exports could soon return to a pre-ban level of 2.5 million to 3 million tonnes per month.
The ban shocked a global vegetable oil market already under pressure from a sunflower oil shortage caused by the war in Ukraine.
The delays in restarting shipments has meant abundant palm fruit supplies, and low prices for Indonesian farmers, hundreds of which protested earlier this month when palm fruit prices fell 70%.
In Riau and West Sulawesi provinces, trucks have been waiting two or three days in long lines outside some palm oil mills, partly due to the lack of export progress, farmers said, just as Indonesia enters its peak harvest period.
Prices of palm fruits have stabilised since the government announced the ban's lifting, but many mills have more fruits than they can handle due to higher supply and could not offer farmers better pricing, said Ridho Ikhsan, a palm farmer in Riau.
"The loading in Dumai (port) is slow, so the mills are keeping prices steady," Ridho said.
"Farmers are restless because the price of fertiliser is still not coming down. While palm fruit price has increased, they're not yet at the levels expected by farmers."

ARTICLE 96
TITLE: One arrested over theft of cooking oil - Deshdoot
URL: https://www.deshdoot.com/deshdoot-times/one-arrested-over-theft-of-cooking-oil

NASHIK: Amid surge in cooking oil prices, Panchavati police have arrested a thief from Thane who had stolen cooking oil cans worth lakhs of rupees from a shop in Sharadchandra Pawar Market Yard in Nashik.
According to the police, a case was registered at Panchavati police station by J M Traders, a wholesale grocery store at market yard on May 11 against unknown person for stealing material worth Rs 4.76 lakhs. In this case, under the guidance of senior police inspector of Panchavati police station Sitaram Kolhe and PI (administration) Ranjit Nalwade, assistant police inspector Satyavan Pawar and his team memebers checked the CCTV footage on the way from the spot and found a suspicious tempo in it.
In this connection, with the help of senior PI Milind Desai and API Yogesh Kale of Navghar police, Thane district, the suspect Mahavir Johar Singh Kumawat (34, Silver Park, Meera Road East, Thane) has been arrested and interrogated. He and two other accomplices confessed to the theft.

ARTICLE 97
TITLE: India's May palm oil imports surge to 7-month high despite Indonesia's ban-dealers
URL: https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/economy/foreign-trade/indias-may-palm-oil-imports-surge-to-7-month-high-despite-indonesias-ban-dealers/articleshow/92034277.cms

Higher purchases by India, the world's biggest importer of vegetable oil, could support Malaysian palm oil prices, which are trading near a record high.
India imported 660,000 tonnes of palm oil in May, up from 572,508 tonnes in April, according to the average estimate from five dealers.
Indian imports from Indonesia fell in May, but refiners managed to buy more from Malaysia, Thailand and Papua New Guinea, said Sandeep Bajoria, chief executive of Sunvin Group, a vegetable oil brokerage and consultancy.
Indonesia, the world's biggest producer and exporter of palm oil, on April 28 halted exports of the product to control soaring prices at home. Jakarta allowed exports to resume from May 23 but put in place policies to safeguard domestic supplies.
Sunflower oil imports jumped to 123,970 tonnes in May from 67,788 tonnes a month earlier, the government official said.
India buys soyoil mainly from Argentina and Brazil and sunflower oil from Ukraine and Russia.
"As sunoil shipments from Ukraine have stopped, India is trying to import more from Russia," the dealer said.

ARTICLE 98
TITLE: India's palm oil imports in May surge to 7 month high despite Indonesia's ban - BusinessToday
URL: https://www.businesstoday.in/latest/story/indias-palm-oil-imports-in-may-surge-to-7-month-high-despite-indonesias-ban-336438-2022-06-06?utm_source=rssfeed

India's palm oil exports in May were its highest in seven months and up 15% on April as the country overcame curbs on Indonesian exports by sourcing more of the commodity from Malaysia, Thailand and Papua New Guinea, five industry officials said.
Higher purchases by India, the world's biggest importer of vegetable oil, could support Malaysian palm oil prices, which are trading near a record high.
India imported 660,000 tonnes of palm oil in May, up from 572,508 tonnes in April, according to the average estimate from five dealers.
Indian imports from Indonesia fell in May, but refiners managed to buy more from Malaysia, Thailand and Papua New Guinea, said Sandeep Bajoria, chief executive of Sunvin Group, a vegetable oil brokerage and consultancy.
Indonesia, the world's biggest producer and exporter of palm oil, on April 28 halted exports of the product to control soaring prices at home. Jakarta allowed exports to resume from May 23 but put in place policies to safeguard domestic supplies. Read full story
The Solvent Extractors' Association of India, a trade body based in Mumbai, is likely to publish May's import figure in mid-June.
India's soyoil imports in May rose to 352,614 tonnes from 315,853 tonnes in April, said a senior government official, who declined to be named.
The country's soyoil imports could rise sharply in coming months, because New Delhi has allowed duty free imports of 2 million tonnes of the commodity, said a Mumbai-based dealer with a global trading firm. Read full story
Sunflower oil imports jumped to 123,970 tonnes in May from 67,788 tonnes a month earlier, the government official said.
India buys soyoil mainly from Argentina and Brazil and sunflower oil from Ukraine and Russia.
"As sunoil shipments from Ukraine have stopped, India is trying to import more from Russia," the dealer said.

ARTICLE 99
TITLE: India's May palm oil imports surge to 7-month high despite Indonesia's ban | Today News
URL: https://www.livemint.com/news/india/indias-may-palm-oil-imports-surge-to-7-month-high-despite-indonesia-s-ban-11654510695288.html

India's May palm oil imports surge to 7-month high despite Indonesia's ban
India imported 660,000 tonnes of palm oil in May, up from 572,508 tonnes in April, according to the average estimate from five dealers.
Reuters
Updated6 Jun 2022, 03:52 PM IST
India's palm oil exports in May were its highest in seven months and up 15% on April as the country overcame curbs on Indonesian exports by sourcing more of the commodity from Malaysia, Thailand and Papua New Guinea, five industry officials said.
Higher purchases by India, the world's biggest importer of vegetable oil, could support Malaysian palm oil prices, which are trading near a record high.
India imported 660,000 tonnes of palm oil in May, up from 572,508 tonnes in April, according to the average estimate from five dealers.
Indian imports from Indonesia fell in May, but refiners managed to buy more from Malaysia, Thailand and Papua New Guinea, said Sandeep Bajoria, chief executive of Sunvin Group, a vegetable oil brokerage and consultancy.
Indonesia, the world's biggest producer and exporter of palm oil, on April 28 halted exports of the product to control soaring prices at home. Jakarta allowed exports to resume from May 23 but put in place policies to safeguard domestic supplies.
The Solvent Extractors' Association of India, a trade body based in Mumbai, is likely to publish May's import figure in mid-June.
India's soyoil imports in May rose to 352,614 tonnes from 315,853 tonnes in April, said a senior government official, who declined to be named.
The country's soyoil imports could rise sharply in coming months, because New Delhi has allowed duty free imports of 2 million tonnes of the commodity, said a Mumbai-based dealer with a global trading firm.
Sunflower oil imports jumped to 123,970 tonnes in May from 67,788 tonnes a month earlier, the government official said.
India buys soyoil mainly from Argentina and Brazil and sunflower oil from Ukraine and Russia.
"As sunoil shipments from Ukraine have stopped, India is trying to import more from Russia," the dealer said.

ARTICLE 100
TITLE: Edible oil makers urge for lifting of futures trade ban on crude palm oil and soy oil on commodity exchanges
URL: https://www.financialexpress.com/market/commodities/edible-oil-makers-urge-for-lifting-of-futures-trade-ban-on-crude-palm-oil-and-soy-oil-on-commodity-exchanges/2664648/

The Solvent Extractors’ Association (SEA) of India, a body of edible oil manufacturers, on Monday demanded lifting of ban on futures trade in soya oil and crude palm oil (CPO) on the commodity exchanges imposed on December, 2021, to ensure risk management and price discovery mechanism.
SEA has stated that the ban on futures trade has deprived importers of hedging their price risks in rupee-denominated soya oil and crude palm oil futures on Indian exchanges.
“In recent months, edible oil importers have faced huge financial losses due to abnormal volatility in international and domestic prices on one side and weakening rupee on the other,” according to a SEA statement. India imports 56% of its edible oil requirements. Russia and Ukraine conflict, and Indonesia, the biggest exporter of palm oil, imposing a ban on exports in May (which was lifted after three weeks) have impacted global edible oil prices.
Also read| Govt extends concessional import duties on edible oil by six months till March, 2023
Stating that the analysis of the price behaviour of major edible oil and oilseeds indicate that they have behaved as per the global fundamentals, Atul Chaturvedi, president, SEA, in a communication to the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Sebi), said, “We are of the considered view that futures market is not responsible for edible oil inflation as the same has been proved in the recent run up which had nothing to do with futures market as the same was not operational,”.
“India is a major importer of edible oils and hence the supply demand dynamics in the international market directly impacts the domestic prices,” SEA said. Resumption of futures trade on the commodity exchanges would go a long way in improving the supply chain in edible oils and replenishing buffer stocks which had depleted. It has stated that the move would help tackle inflationary pressures in food. India’s annual imports are around 13-14 million tonne (mt). Around 8 mt of palm oil is imported from Indonesia and Malaysia, while other oils, such as soya and sunflower, come from Argentina, Brazil, Ukraine and Russia.
Also read| Edible oil makers asked to remove packing temperature details
Earlier, the Central Organisation for Oil Industry and Trade (COOIT) and the Mustard Oil Producers Association of India along with a number of farmer producer organisations (FPOs) have called for lifting futures trade ban. COOIT in its communication to the finance ministry recently had said “harvesting of kharif crops will start in the next few months and many commodities will start coming into the mandis and in the absence of futures markets a reference price isn’t available which will make operating in the spot markets difficult,”.
To curb inflation, on December 20, 2021, Sebi had banned futures trade of wheat, paddy (non-basmati), chana, mustard seeds, soya bean, crude palm oil and moong for one year. Earlier, mustard seed and chana (gram) futures trade were suspended on October 8, 2021, and August 16, 2021, respectively.

ARTICLE 101
TITLE: Futures trading key for price risk management, says edible oil industry as SEBI extends ban
URL: http://www.indiasnews.net/news/273253426/futures-trading-key-for-price-risk-management-says-edible-oil-industry-as-sebi-extends-ban

New Delhi [India], December 23 (ANI): Domestic edible oil industry body Solvent Extractors' Association of India (SEA) has appealed to the government to reconsider the extension in the futures trading ban on edible oils, saying it is essential for price risk management.
"A healthy futures market is very important for price risk management as well as orderly development of agri markets and also provides price signals to all stakeholders including Government," the industry body SEA said in a statement on Thursday.
India is the world's second-largest consumer and number one vegetable oil importer, and it meets 55-60 per cent of its need through imports.
Financial markets regulator Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) on Tuesday extended the suspension of trading in derivative contracts for seven commodities -- paddy (non-basmati), wheat, chana, mustard seeds and its derivatives, soyabean and its derivatives, crude palm oil and moong -- for one more year.
In December 2021, SEBI suspended trading in these agricultural derivatives for a year. In order to curb inflation, the regulator prohibited exchanges from launching new derivative contracts in these agricultural commodities.
"We were hopeful that the ban would be lifted and importers can breathe easy. However, this decision has put a dampener on the Risk Mitigation too," the industry body said in the statement.
Many studies that were conducted in the past have amply clarified that futures trading is not responsible for inflationary pressures, it noted.
Trade and industry were eagerly expecting the government to lift the suspension of at least internationally traded commodities like crude palm oil and soybean along with its derivatives.
"Unfortunately, Government in its wisdom decided to continue the suspension for one more year till December 20, 2023. It's a serious setback. Trade and industry will be deprived of hedging and price discovery mechanism for smooth business operations and will be exposed to price volatility. Even the Government would be deprived of price signals as the messenger (futures trading) would be dead," it said while appealing to the government to reconsider the decision. (ANI)

ARTICLE 102
TITLE: Futures trading key for price risk management, says edible oil industry as SEBI extends ban
URL: http://www.newdelhinews.net/news/273253426/futures-trading-key-for-price-risk-management-says-edible-oil-industry-as-sebi-extends-ban

New Delhi [India], December 23 (ANI): Domestic edible oil industry body Solvent Extractors' Association of India (SEA) has appealed to the government to reconsider the extension in the futures trading ban on edible oils, saying it is essential for price risk management.
"A healthy futures market is very important for price risk management as well as orderly development of agri markets and also provides price signals to all stakeholders including Government," the industry body SEA said in a statement on Thursday.
India is the world's second-largest consumer and number one vegetable oil importer, and it meets 55-60 per cent of its need through imports.
Financial markets regulator Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) on Tuesday extended the suspension of trading in derivative contracts for seven commodities -- paddy (non-basmati), wheat, chana, mustard seeds and its derivatives, soyabean and its derivatives, crude palm oil and moong -- for one more year.
In December 2021, SEBI suspended trading in these agricultural derivatives for a year. In order to curb inflation, the regulator prohibited exchanges from launching new derivative contracts in these agricultural commodities.
"We were hopeful that the ban would be lifted and importers can breathe easy. However, this decision has put a dampener on the Risk Mitigation too," the industry body said in the statement.
Many studies that were conducted in the past have amply clarified that futures trading is not responsible for inflationary pressures, it noted.
Trade and industry were eagerly expecting the government to lift the suspension of at least internationally traded commodities like crude palm oil and soybean along with its derivatives.
"Unfortunately, Government in its wisdom decided to continue the suspension for one more year till December 20, 2023. It's a serious setback. Trade and industry will be deprived of hedging and price discovery mechanism for smooth business operations and will be exposed to price volatility. Even the Government would be deprived of price signals as the messenger (futures trading) would be dead," it said while appealing to the government to reconsider the decision. (ANI)

ARTICLE 103
TITLE: Steps to arrest decline in key edible oil prices soon
URL: https://www.financialexpress.com/economy/steps-to-arrest-decline-in-key-edible-oil-prices-soon/3023894/

With mandi prices of mustard falling below the Minimum Support Price (MSP) of Rs 5,450/quintal after staying far above the threshold for over two years, the government has decided to procure 2.7 million tonne (MT) of the oilseed from farmers in key producing states namely Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Haryana and Gujarat. The prices of soyabean, another key oil seed, have also fallen in recent months, but there is no plan to hike the import duty on these edible oils right now, official sources said.
The state co-operative marketing federations will be procuring mustard in collaboration with the farmers’ cooperative Nafed from April 1.
Also read: Softening global prices may help rein in fertiliser subsidy in FY24
The Rajasthan state co-operative marketing federation (Rajfed) will purchase 1.5 MT of mustard at MSP from farmers.
Mandi prices of mustard at Bharatpur (Rajasthan), the hub of oilseeds trade, is currently ruling around Rs 5100 – 5200/quintal amid the prospects of a bumper harvest. Such prices are the lowest in two years.
The mandis prices in November last year was around Rs 7,500/quintal. The procurement will be carried out after a gap of two years. “Purchase by the government agencies are likely to push mandi prices above MSP,” an official told FE. MSP purchases of edible oils are very limited; in the last two years, mustard oil wasn’t purchased by the government as market prices remained firm.
Harvesting of mustard has been completed by farmers and the arrivals in mandis are likely to pick by middle of April.
“We expect the mandi prices to improve after April 1, after the government start buying from the farmers,” a spokesperson of P Mark mustard oil, a leading edible oil brand, said.
The agriculture ministry has estimated mustard seed production at a record 12.8 MT in the 2022-23 crop year (July-June). Area under mustard in the current rabi season has been reported at a record 9.8 million hectare (MH) which is 64% more than last five years’ average sown area of 6.4 MH. In the 2021-22 season, mustard sown areas stood at 9.1 MH.
Currently, Rajasthan (40%), Madhya Pradesh (14%), Uttar Pradesh (9%) and Haryana (7%), have 70% share in the country’s mustard seed production.Meanwhile a food ministry official on Monday ruled out possibilities of hiking importing duties on edible oil citing the need to balance between consumers’ and farmers’ interests.
The prices of soybean, another key oil seed, have fallen in recent months. Trade and processing bodies -Solvent Extractors Association of India and Soybean Processors Association of India (SOPA) have urged the government to hike the import duties on edible oil, especially palm oil to a minimum of 20% from the current level of 5.5%.
The government cut import duties on crude palm, soybean and sunflower oils in September 2022.
The landed prices of palm oil (at Mumbai port), which has close to 60% share in the country’s import basket, has declined by 46% to $ 975/tonne on March 24, against $1,828/tonne prevailed a year ago.
Landed prices of crude soy and sunflower have declined 43% and 54% to $1,050/tonne and $ 960/tonne respectively.
Also read: Jute MSP hiked by 6%, move to benefit 4 million farmers
“This will not only be in the interest of farmers and consumers but will also give additional revenue to the Government,” SOPA has stated in a communication to Piyush Goyal, union minister of commerce and industry.
The retail inflation in mustard oil declined by 9.8% in February, 2023 against a year ago period.
India imports about 56% of the annual edible oil consumption of around 24 to 25 MT. The share of domestic edible oil includes mustard (40%), soyabean (24%) and groundnut (7%) and others.

ARTICLE 104
TITLE: Bihar: Massive fire breaks out at Refined Oil Warehouse in Patna
URL: https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/videos/news/bihar-massive-fire-breaks-out-at-refined-oil-warehouse-in-patna/videoshow/99585193.cms

Bihar: Massive fire breaks out at Refined Oil Warehouse in Patna
| Apr 18, 2023, 04:04:26 PM | ANI
A fire broke out at Refined Oil Warehouse in Patna, Bihar on April 18. Fire tenders were rushed to the spot to douse the flames. The reason behind the fire is yet to be ascertained. Further details are awaited.

ARTICLE 105
TITLE: 5, including cop, arrested for stealing cooking oil in Pakistan. They used a police van
URL: https://www.hindustantimes.com/world-news/5-including-cop-arrested-for-stealing-cooking-oil-in-pakistan-they-used-a-police-van-101688694534952.html

5, including cop, arrested for stealing cooking oil in Pakistan. They used a police van
Pakistan: The police said that dozens of such robbery incidents were reported last month.
The Karachi police arrested a three-member gang that used to loot stocks of cooking oil in a police van, a report claimed. Over five suspected members of the gangs were named during a raid near the Garden Headquarters, the police was quoted as saying by ARY News.
The arrested include the owner of a godown, a worker, and a policeman. They used a police van to loot from goods vehicles transporting stocks of cooking oil in District Central, the report claimed. The police said that dozens of such robbery incidents were reported last month. The accused used to hide the cooking oil in the godown, the police said.
How were the arrests made?
The Clifton division police said that it arrested two individuals earlier this month in a successful tip-off operation in the Defence and Clifton region. The suspects, Ashraf alias Achho and Asif, are accused of leading a gang of thieves that committed many robberies in Karachi.
What has the police said about the incident?
Ahmed Chaudhry, superintendent of Police (SP) Clifton, said the three robbers from the Achho gang are allegedly most wanted by the police. The police found jewellery and other expensive things during the operation, totalling millions of dollars. The tools used in the thefts were also seized from the accused, police said.
The gang consisted of three members and one of their accomplices, Khurshid, was already serving time in jail for his involvement in similar crimes, Ahmed Chaudhry said.
The gang had been active in robberies for nearly 16 years, he added.

ARTICLE 106
TITLE: Fire Breaks Out At Edible Oil Godown | Coimbatore News - Times of India
URL: https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/coimbatore/fire-breaks-out-at-edible-oil-godown/articleshow/103744778.cms

Coimbatore: A fire broke out at an edible oil godown on Bharathiyar Road around 11pm on Saturday. The blaze was put out after a 20-minute battle. The cause of the fire is yet to be ascertained. 
The incident took place at Venkatesha oil mill departmental store on Bharathiyar Road, opposite the government polytechnic college for women. The oil mill, which was functioning behind a departmental store, belonged to the elder brother of Ku Ramakrishnan, general secretary, Thanthai Periyar Dravidar Kazhagam (TPDK).
Motorists noticed flames emanating from the godown around 11pm and informed the Coimbatore South fire station, after which two fire tending brigades rushed to the spot.
âThere were a few cans of edible oil stored in the godown. We put out the fire within 20 minutes. The cause of the fire is yet to be ascertained,â said a fireman.
The Race Course police have registered a case and further investigation is on.
We also published the following articles recently
Fire breaks out at godown in Delhi's Vasant Kunj, no casualtyA fire broke out at a temporary structure of a tent godown in Vasant Kunj, southwest Delhi. The fire was reported at 11.32 am and 12 fire tenders were deployed to control the blaze. It was brought under control by 1.35 pm and there were no reported injuries. The cooling process is currently underway. Fire brigade to get drones to put out fires at highrisesThe fire and rescue services department in Ernakulam, India, plans to deploy drones for firefighting in high-rise buildings. The department has invited expressions of interest to purchase two drones that can be controlled remotely and equipped with a firefighting nozzle, camera, and water hose. The drones will be used to extinguish fires in areas that are too dangerous or difficult for firefighters to access. They will also be used in waste dumping yards and areas with narrow roads that can delay fire trucks. Fire breaks out in Zirakpur mall storeA readymade garments showroom in a mall in Zirakpur, Mohali, was damaged in a major fire caused by an electrical short circuit. The fire was doused by three fire tenders, and no one was inside the showroom at the time. In another news, the fire and rescue services department in Ernakulam, India, is planning to use drones for firefighting in high-rise buildings. Additionally, two unidentified men on a motorcycle fired shots outside a house in Derabassi, Mohali, and the police are investigating the incident.

ARTICLE 107
TITLE: Kuwait bans export of used cooking oil for one year
URL: https://www.siasat.com/kuwait-bans-export-of-used-cooking-oil-for-one-year-2920355/

The Kuwaiti authorities have imposed a one-year ban on the export of used cooking oil and its waste, local media reported.
The announcement was made as the Minister of Trade and Industry and the Minister of State for Youth Affairs issued a Ministerial Resolution No. 172 of 2023 to enhance biofuel production value and promote sustainable practices.
The resolution stipulates that used cooking oil or waste can only be sold to licensed individuals or entities. Those involved in this activity must have a licensed location as per the authorities.
As per a report by Arab Times, the resolution mandates electronic payment methods for all financial transactions related to used cooking oil or waste sales to enhance transparency and efficiency within the industry.
The explanatory memorandum emphasizes the importance of the ban in Kuwait for enhancing its added value. The country plans to transform used cooking oil waste into biofuel, aiming to create self-sufficient products, diversify income sources, and transfer modern technology.

ARTICLE 108
TITLE: Edible oil industry urges Centre not to extend export ban on de-oiled rice bran
URL: https://www.bombaynews.net/news/274385248/edible-oil-industry-urges-centre-not-to-extend-export-ban-on-de-oiled-rice-bran

New Delhi [India], May 26 (ANI): Edible oil industry body Solvent Extractors Association of India (SEA) has requested the central government not to extend the ban on the exports of de-oiled rice bran, which is presently under prohibition.
The government initially banned the export of the commodity in July 2023 for four months and later extended it until March 2024, and then again by another four months till July.
The move was intended apparently to address inflation in milk prices and fodder costs.
De-oiled rice bran (DORB) is a by-product of the rice milling process that's made from the pressed cake of rice bran after oil is extracted from it. It is widely used as livestock feed.
India typically exports about 5 to 6 lakh tonnes of de-oiled rice bran, primarily to Vietnam, Thailand, and other Asian countries, establishing itself as a reliable supplier in the international market.
"De-oiled rice bran prices are now at a lower level and are likely to decrease further with increased availability of DDGS. In light of these facts and the sharp fall in prices, the Association has appealed to the government not to extend the prohibition beyond July 31, 2024," as per a letter written by the industry body's President, Ajay Jhunjhunwala to its members.
The industry body is of the view that India, over the past 30 years, has successfully developed an export market for de-oiled rice bran, primarily serving Vietnam, Thailand, Bangladesh and other Asian countries.
Meanwhile, India's overall oilmeal exports during April 2024 were 6 per cent lower on a yearly basis at 4.65 lakh tonnes. During the same month last year, the total exports were 4.93 lakh tonnes, industry data showed. Much of the decline in overall exports in April could be attributed to the prohibition of exports of de-oiled rice bran.
In break up, exports of soybean meal rose while that of mustard meal declined.
Oilmeals are the residue left over after the extraction of oil from oilseeds and it is widely utilized as livestock feed globally.
The total oilmeal exports during November-April, the first six months of the current marketing year, indicated the revival of soybean meal exports which jumped from 10.4 lakh tonnes to 16.6 lakh metric tons.
While rapeseed meal exports are down by nearly 23 per cent so far this season at 9.3 lakh tonnes. The industry body said last year the exports were higher as India could export substantial quantities due to price advantage vis-a-vis other supplying countries.
India is the world's second-largest consumer and leading vegetable oil importer, and meets 60 per cent of its needs through imports, primarily from Indonesia and Malaysia.
While oilseed production in India has witnessed growth over the years, it has not kept pace with consumption, leading to a continued reliance on imports. (ANI)

ARTICLE 109
TITLE: Edible oil industry urges Centre not to extend export ban on de-oiled rice bran
URL: https://www.indiasnews.net/news/274385248/edible-oil-industry-urges-centre-not-to-extend-export-ban-on-de-oiled-rice-bran

New Delhi [India], May 26 (ANI): Edible oil industry body Solvent Extractors Association of India (SEA) has requested the central government not to extend the ban on the exports of de-oiled rice bran, which is presently under prohibition.
The government initially banned the export of the commodity in July 2023 for four months and later extended it until March 2024, and then again by another four months till July.
The move was intended apparently to address inflation in milk prices and fodder costs.
De-oiled rice bran (DORB) is a by-product of the rice milling process that's made from the pressed cake of rice bran after oil is extracted from it. It is widely used as livestock feed.
India typically exports about 5 to 6 lakh tonnes of de-oiled rice bran, primarily to Vietnam, Thailand, and other Asian countries, establishing itself as a reliable supplier in the international market.
"De-oiled rice bran prices are now at a lower level and are likely to decrease further with increased availability of DDGS. In light of these facts and the sharp fall in prices, the Association has appealed to the government not to extend the prohibition beyond July 31, 2024," as per a letter written by the industry body's President, Ajay Jhunjhunwala to its members.
The industry body is of the view that India, over the past 30 years, has successfully developed an export market for de-oiled rice bran, primarily serving Vietnam, Thailand, Bangladesh and other Asian countries.
Meanwhile, India's overall oilmeal exports during April 2024 were 6 per cent lower on a yearly basis at 4.65 lakh tonnes. During the same month last year, the total exports were 4.93 lakh tonnes, industry data showed. Much of the decline in overall exports in April could be attributed to the prohibition of exports of de-oiled rice bran.
In break up, exports of soybean meal rose while that of mustard meal declined.
Oilmeals are the residue left over after the extraction of oil from oilseeds and it is widely utilized as livestock feed globally.
The total oilmeal exports during November-April, the first six months of the current marketing year, indicated the revival of soybean meal exports which jumped from 10.4 lakh tonnes to 16.6 lakh metric tons.
While rapeseed meal exports are down by nearly 23 per cent so far this season at 9.3 lakh tonnes. The industry body said last year the exports were higher as India could export substantial quantities due to price advantage vis-a-vis other supplying countries.
India is the world's second-largest consumer and leading vegetable oil importer, and meets 60 per cent of its needs through imports, primarily from Indonesia and Malaysia.
While oilseed production in India has witnessed growth over the years, it has not kept pace with consumption, leading to a continued reliance on imports. (ANI)

ARTICLE 110
TITLE: Edible oil industry urges Centre not to extend export ban on de-oiled rice bran
URL: https://www.mumbainews.net/news/274385248/edible-oil-industry-urges-centre-not-to-extend-export-ban-on-de-oiled-rice-bran

New Delhi [India], May 26 (ANI): Edible oil industry body Solvent Extractors Association of India (SEA) has requested the central government not to extend the ban on the exports of de-oiled rice bran, which is presently under prohibition.
The government initially banned the export of the commodity in July 2023 for four months and later extended it until March 2024, and then again by another four months till July.
The move was intended apparently to address inflation in milk prices and fodder costs.
De-oiled rice bran (DORB) is a by-product of the rice milling process that's made from the pressed cake of rice bran after oil is extracted from it. It is widely used as livestock feed.
India typically exports about 5 to 6 lakh tonnes of de-oiled rice bran, primarily to Vietnam, Thailand, and other Asian countries, establishing itself as a reliable supplier in the international market.
"De-oiled rice bran prices are now at a lower level and are likely to decrease further with increased availability of DDGS. In light of these facts and the sharp fall in prices, the Association has appealed to the government not to extend the prohibition beyond July 31, 2024," as per a letter written by the industry body's President, Ajay Jhunjhunwala to its members.
The industry body is of the view that India, over the past 30 years, has successfully developed an export market for de-oiled rice bran, primarily serving Vietnam, Thailand, Bangladesh and other Asian countries.
Meanwhile, India's overall oilmeal exports during April 2024 were 6 per cent lower on a yearly basis at 4.65 lakh tonnes. During the same month last year, the total exports were 4.93 lakh tonnes, industry data showed. Much of the decline in overall exports in April could be attributed to the prohibition of exports of de-oiled rice bran.
In break up, exports of soybean meal rose while that of mustard meal declined.
Oilmeals are the residue left over after the extraction of oil from oilseeds and it is widely utilized as livestock feed globally.
The total oilmeal exports during November-April, the first six months of the current marketing year, indicated the revival of soybean meal exports which jumped from 10.4 lakh tonnes to 16.6 lakh metric tons.
While rapeseed meal exports are down by nearly 23 per cent so far this season at 9.3 lakh tonnes. The industry body said last year the exports were higher as India could export substantial quantities due to price advantage vis-a-vis other supplying countries.
India is the world's second-largest consumer and leading vegetable oil importer, and meets 60 per cent of its needs through imports, primarily from Indonesia and Malaysia.
While oilseed production in India has witnessed growth over the years, it has not kept pace with consumption, leading to a continued reliance on imports. (ANI)

ARTICLE 111
TITLE: Edible oil industry urges Centre not to extend export ban on de-oiled rice bran
URL: https://www.newdelhinews.net/news/274385248/edible-oil-industry-urges-centre-not-to-extend-export-ban-on-de-oiled-rice-bran

New Delhi [India], May 26 (ANI): Edible oil industry body Solvent Extractors Association of India (SEA) has requested the central government not to extend the ban on the exports of de-oiled rice bran, which is presently under prohibition.
The government initially banned the export of the commodity in July 2023 for four months and later extended it until March 2024, and then again by another four months till July.
The move was intended apparently to address inflation in milk prices and fodder costs.
De-oiled rice bran (DORB) is a by-product of the rice milling process that's made from the pressed cake of rice bran after oil is extracted from it. It is widely used as livestock feed.
India typically exports about 5 to 6 lakh tonnes of de-oiled rice bran, primarily to Vietnam, Thailand, and other Asian countries, establishing itself as a reliable supplier in the international market.
"De-oiled rice bran prices are now at a lower level and are likely to decrease further with increased availability of DDGS. In light of these facts and the sharp fall in prices, the Association has appealed to the government not to extend the prohibition beyond July 31, 2024," as per a letter written by the industry body's President, Ajay Jhunjhunwala to its members.
The industry body is of the view that India, over the past 30 years, has successfully developed an export market for de-oiled rice bran, primarily serving Vietnam, Thailand, Bangladesh and other Asian countries.
Meanwhile, India's overall oilmeal exports during April 2024 were 6 per cent lower on a yearly basis at 4.65 lakh tonnes. During the same month last year, the total exports were 4.93 lakh tonnes, industry data showed. Much of the decline in overall exports in April could be attributed to the prohibition of exports of de-oiled rice bran.
In break up, exports of soybean meal rose while that of mustard meal declined.
Oilmeals are the residue left over after the extraction of oil from oilseeds and it is widely utilized as livestock feed globally.
The total oilmeal exports during November-April, the first six months of the current marketing year, indicated the revival of soybean meal exports which jumped from 10.4 lakh tonnes to 16.6 lakh metric tons.
While rapeseed meal exports are down by nearly 23 per cent so far this season at 9.3 lakh tonnes. The industry body said last year the exports were higher as India could export substantial quantities due to price advantage vis-a-vis other supplying countries.
India is the world's second-largest consumer and leading vegetable oil importer, and meets 60 per cent of its needs through imports, primarily from Indonesia and Malaysia.
While oilseed production in India has witnessed growth over the years, it has not kept pace with consumption, leading to a continued reliance on imports. (ANI)

ARTICLE 112
TITLE: Edible Oil Industry Urges Centre Not To Extend Export Ban On De-Oiled Rice Bran | Economy News | Zee News
URL: https://zeenews.india.com/economy/edible-oil-industry-urges-centre-not-to-extend-export-ban-on-de-oiled-rice-bran-2752589.html

New Delhi: Edible oil industry body Solvent Extractors Association of India (SEA) has requested the central government not to extend the ban on the exports of de-oiled rice bran, which is presently under prohibition. The government initially banned the export of the commodity in July 2023 for four months and later extended it until March 2024, and then again by another four months till July.
The move was intended apparently to address inflation in milk prices and fodder costs. De-oiled rice bran (DORB) is a by-product of the rice milling process that's made from the pressed cake of rice bran after oil is extracted from it. It is widely used as livestock feed. (Also Read: Swiss Cheese, Chocolate, And Watches To Get Cheaper For Indian Consumers)
India typically exports about 5 to 6 lakh tonnes of de-oiled rice bran, primarily to Vietnam, Thailand, and other Asian countries, establishing itself as a reliable supplier in the international market. "De-oiled rice bran prices are now at a lower level and are likely to decrease further with increased availability of DDGS. In light of these facts and the sharp fall in prices, the Association has appealed to the government not to extend the prohibition beyond July 31, 2024," as per a letter written by the industry body's President, Ajay Jhunjhunwala to its members.
The industry body is of the view that India, over the past 30 years, has successfully developed an export market for de-oiled rice bran, primarily serving Vietnam, Thailand, Bangladesh and other Asian countries. (Also Read: GAIL Inaugurates 10 MW Green Hydrogen Plant In Madhya Pradesh)
Meanwhile, India's overall oilmeal exports during April 2024 were 6 per cent lower on a yearly basis at 4.65 lakh tonnes. During the same month last year, the total exports were 4.93 lakh tonnes, industry data showed. Much of the decline in overall exports in April could be attributed to the prohibition of exports of de-oiled rice bran.
In break up, exports of soybean meal rose while that of mustard meal declined. Oilmeals are the residue left over after the extraction of oil from oilseeds and it is widely utilized as livestock feed globally. The total oilmeal exports during November-April, the first six months of the current marketing year, indicated the revival of soybean meal exports which jumped from 10.4 lakh tonnes to 16.6 lakh metric tons.
While rapeseed meal exports are down by nearly 23 per cent so far this season at 9.3 lakh tonnes. The industry body said last year the exports were higher as India could export substantial quantities due to price advantage vis-a-vis other supplying countries.
India is the world's second-largest consumer and leading vegetable oil importer, and meets 60 per cent of its needs through imports, primarily from Indonesia and Malaysia. While oilseed production in India has witnessed growth over the years, it has not kept pace with consumption, leading to a continued reliance on imports.
Stay informed on all the latest news, real-time breaking news updates, and follow all the important headlines in india news and world news on Zee News.

ARTICLE 113
TITLE: Major Edible Oil Theft Racket Dismantled in Ahmedabad: Seven Arrested | Ahmedabad News - Times of India
URL: https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/ahmedabad/major-edible-oil-theft-racket-dismantled-in-ahmedabad-seven-arrested/articleshow/114174719.cms

Ahmedabad: The CID crime, Ahmedabad zone, unearthed a major racket where edible oil was stolen from oil tankers and filled in 15-litre tins illegally. The driver of the tanker was paid Rs 900 for a 15kg tin, police said. 
An FIR was registered on Friday against seven persons by Laxman Rana, head constable with the CID crime. The complainant stated that Rahul Bharwad and Akhilesh Bhatia allegedly hired men and were involved in edible oil theft by conspiring with the drivers of tankers transporting sunflower edible oil. The edible oil theft was taking place in an open parking area on the Sardar Patel Ring Road near Aslali Circle. 
The FIR names Rahul Bharwad, 27, Kesharam Thakkar, 23, Jetharam Kadela, 19, Shankarlal Bisnoi, Suresh Yadav, Jagdish Karvar, and Akhilesh Bhatia as the accused in the incident. The complainant stated that all individuals were caught illegally extracting oil from tankers meant for Gokul Industry, and when questioned, they admitted that Bharwad and Bhatia collaborated with tanker drivers to extract and sell oil for their financial gain.
The drivers were lured to loosen the seals on the tankers, allowing the extraction of oil, which was then resealed. The FIR states that Thakkar and Kadela were paid Rs 15,000 and Rs 13,000 respectively for this work.
The FIR stated that during the search in the surrounding areas, they found 22 metal boxes filled with edible oil in a nearby room. Among these, 15 boxes contained edible soybean oil, four boxes contained edible sunflower oil, and three boxes contained mixed edible oil. Each box contained 15 litres.
The officials said that samples were taken from each box and sent for analysis by the FSL.

ARTICLE 114
TITLE: Aloe vera on face to coconut oil banana hair mask: Dermat rates popular home DIY remedies on a scale of 1 to 10
URL: https://www.hindustantimes.com/lifestyle/health/aloe-vera-on-face-to-coconut-oil-banana-hair-mask-dermat-rates-popular-home-diy-remedies-on-a-scale-of-1-to-10-101742713884903.html

Aloe vera on face to coconut oil banana hair mask: Dermat rates popular home DIY remedies on a scale of 1 to 10
Not every concoction you prepare in the kitchen is skin-friendly. On a scale of 1 to 10, a dermat rated the popular skin and hair care remedies.
Everyone has a soft corner for DIY homemade beauty hacks. Since they are prepared from organic, natural ingredients found in the kitchen, they are treated as sacred rituals passed down from grandmothers. They gain a reputation as miraculous fixes. Without second thoughts, most of us slather the kitchen concoction in hopes of some magic.
ALSO READ: Eat your retinol! Dermat shares recipe of ‘retinol salad’
But should they get a free pass just because they are prepared from homemade and natural ingredients?
Dr Aanchal Panth took to Instagram and shared a video on March 22, rating all the popular beauty hacks on a scale of 1 to 10 with 1 being the worst and 10 being the best. She also shared her reasoning behind the rating.
Here are Dr Panth's ratings and the explanation behind the numbers:
Coconut oil ripe banana hair mask- 10/10
This is a good conditioning mask for dry, frizzy hair. It will help in taming hair flyaways. It can be done once a week. It will also leave your hair smelling good.
Vitamin E capsule on face- 4/10
Applying this capsule on the face gives no real benefits. The formulation has to be made in a way that it penetrates the skin barrier. This is similar to crushing a tablet of vitamin A and applying it on the face. Better to use creams with vitamin E.
Neem paste on face- 0/10
Avoid these irritating pastes on the face. It can dry the skin out and cause irritating contact dermatitis. Better to use either multani mitti paste with rose water for oily skin.
Chia seed mask- 7 or 8/10
This is a good moisturising mask that will help soothe the skin. This works for people with dry skin and those with sensitive skin. It helps in relieving redness as well.
Methi hair pack- 6/10
This mask is good for conditioning the hair. Dr Pantha gave a lower rating as it’s hyped for hair growth which cannot occur with the use of this mask. If you want to tame frizziness, then it will help.
Aloe vera rose water- 9/10
Both ingredients can be used together or separately. Don’t expect magic, but this is definitely soothing on the skin.
Daal scrub on the neck- 0/10
I see this all over the Internet. Please don’t use it on the neck or any body part for that matter. It is only going to irritate the skin and further cause darkness. It is better to use a chemical exfoliant, which will cause controlled exfoliation. A moisturiser and sunscreen are a must.
Lastly, Dr Panth cautioned that home remedies do not treat underlying skin concerns; they only provide gentle exfoliation or moisturisation. She emphasised that it’s always best to consult a physician or dermatologist for any medical diagnosis or treatment options.
Note to readers: This article is for informational purposes only and not a substitute for professional medical advice. Always seek the advice of your doctor with any questions about a medical condition.
- Adrija Dey’s proclivity for observation fuels her storytelling instinct. As a lifestyle journalist, she crafts compelling, relatable narratives across diverse touchpoints of the human experience, including wellness, mental health, relationships, interior design, home decor, food, travel, and fashion that gently nudge readers toward living a little better. For her, stories exist in flesh and bones, carried by human vessels and shaped through everyday endeavours. It is the small stories we live and share that make us human. After all, humans and their lores are the most natural and raw repositories of stories, and uncovering them, for her, is akin to peeling an orange under a winter afternoon sun. Always up for a chat, she believes the best stories come from unfiltered yapping, where "too much information" is kind of the point. A graduate of Indraprastha College for Women, University of Delhi, and an alumna of the Indian Institute of Mass Communication (IIMC), Delhi, Adrija spends her idle hours cocooned with herbal tea and a gripping thriller, scribbling inner monologues she loosely calls poetic pieces, often with her succulents in attendance. On lazier days, she can be found binge-watching, for the nth time, one from her comfort-show holy trinity: The Office (US), Brooklyn Nine-Nine, or Modern Family. Dancing by herself to her peppy playlists, however, is an everyday ritual she swears by religiously.Read More

ARTICLE 115
TITLE: Massive fire at Bhilwara cooking oil warehouse | Jaipur News - The Times of India
URL: https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/jaipur/massive-fire-at-bhilwara-cooking-oil-warehouse/articleshow/120463956.cms

Bhilwara: Five fire brigades made about ten rounds to bring under control a massive fire that erupted in a cooking oil warehouse located in the agricultural market complex in Subhash Nagar police station area of Bhilwara city Sunday afternoon. 
Since it was a Sunday, employees of Balaji Trading Company's oil warehouse at the agricultural market were on leave.
 Traders in the vicinity saw flames emerging from the tin shed above the warehouse and alerted the fire department and Subhash Nagar police station. The tin shed was first dismantled with a loader before the five fire brigades could begin their work. It took three hours of hard work to control the fire, by which time goods worth about Rs 8o lakh were reduced to ashes. 
Subhash Nagar police station in-charge Shivraj Gurjar said the cause of the fire is under investigation, but it is suspected to have been due to a short circuit. The presence of cooking oil inside the warehouse intensified the fire, with smoke and flames visible from two kilometres away, he said. tnn

ARTICLE 116
TITLE: Why is Donald Trump considering ban on Chinese cooking oil, and how are trade tensions affecting US farmers?
URL: https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/international/us/why-is-donald-trump-considering-ban-on-chinese-cooking-oil-and-how-are-trade-tensions-affecting-us-farmers/articleshow/124574341.cms

Trump lashes out at China over soybean freeze
In a post on Truth Social, Trump criticized China’s suspension of American soybean purchases, calling it a “retaliatory measure” against U.S. tariffs imposed in April. He warned that the United States could terminate business with China related to cooking oil and other trade elements as a form of retribution.“We can easily produce cooking oil ourselves; we don’t need to purchase it from China,” Trump said, as quoted in a report by USA Today.
China has long been the largest buyer of American soybeans, with purchases accounting for more than half of U.S. soybean exports. According to the American Soybean Association (ASA), soybean exports to China were valued at roughly $12.6 billion in 2024 out of a total $24.5 billion in U.S. soybean exports.
Impact on U.S. farmers
The freeze has caused concern among soybean producers in states such as Iowa and Illinois, the top two soybean-growing regions in the country. Iowa farmers, in particular, have urged the U.S. administration to negotiate a deal with China as Beijing turns to South American suppliers like Brazil and Argentina.
Trade tensions intensify
Trump’s comments on Tuesday follow a series of conflicting signals over U.S.-China trade relations. On Friday, he suggested that a planned meeting with Chinese President Xi Jinping might be canceled due to China’s restriction on rare earth mineral exports. Trump also threatened a 100% tariff on all Chinese imports, in addition to the 30% tariffs already in place.“It is impossible to believe that China would have taken such an action, but they have, and the rest is history,” Trump wrote on Truth Social.
Just days earlier, on October 6, Trump had indicated that he would meet Xi to discuss soybeans, heightening expectations for a resolution.
Soybean groups express disappointment
The American Soybean Association (ASA) expressed dismay at the latest threats. Caleb Ragland, ASA president and a farmer from Magnolia, Kentucky, described the potential cancellation of talks as “extremely disappointing.”“Trade wars are harmful to everyone, and these latest developments are deeply disappointing at a moment when soybean farmers are facing an ever-growing financial crisis,” Ragland said.
Despite the ongoing tensions, Trump attempted to downplay the situation in a post on Sunday, stating that “it will all be fine” and attributing China’s actions to a “bad moment” by President Xi.
Trump emphasizes cautious approach
During a bilateral meeting with Argentine President Javier Milei on Tuesday, Trump reiterated the need for vigilance in dealings with China.“We have to be careful with China. Look, I have a great relationship with President Xi, but sometimes it gets testy because China likes to take advantage of people and they can't take advantage of us,” he said.
FAQs
Why did Trump threaten to ban cooking oil from China?
Trump reacted to China’s freeze on U.S. soybean purchases, calling it an “economically hostile act” and suggesting retaliatory measures, including halting cooking oil imports.
How significant are soybean exports to China?
 In 2024, China purchased roughly $12.6 billion worth of U.S. soybeans, accounting for more than half of American soybean exports, making it the largest buyer globally.(Catch all the US News, UK News, Canada News, International Breaking News Events, and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)
Download The Economic Times News App to get Daily International News Updates.
(Catch all the US News, UK News, Canada News, International Breaking News Events, and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)
Download The Economic Times News App to get Daily International News Updates.

ARTICLE 117
TITLE: Stopped adulteration, so mustard oil is expensive: Agriculture Minister Narendra Singh Tomar
URL: https://www.freepressjournal.in/india/stopped-adulteration-so-mustard-oil-is-expensive-agriculture-minister-narendra-singh-tomar

New Delhi, June 9: Agriculture Minister Narendra Singh Tomar said that mustard oil has definitely become a bit expensive, because the government has stopped adulteration in it.
He said that the government is keeping an eye on rising inflation
"Our focus is on the prices of pulses and oil. The price of pulses has come down because the government has released the stock, but the price of mustard oil has increased because our government has decided that we will not mix any other edible oil in it so that its purity remains intact."
He said that this decision is very important, it is going to benefit the farmers working in oilseeds and mustard across the country. That is, now the ban on mixing mustard oil in the production and packing of edible vegetable oil prepared from oils from multiple sources has come into force. An order regarding this was issued by the government on Monday.
The Minister also said the government is ready to resume talks with protesting farmers but asked the unions to point out their objections to the provisions of the three farm laws with sound logic.
The government and unions have held 11 rounds of talks, the last being on January 22, to break the deadlock and end the farmers' protest. Talks have not resumed following widespread violence during a tractor rally by protesting farmers on January 26.
Thousands of farmers, mainly from Punjab, Haryana and western Uttar Pradesh, have been camping at Delhi's borders for more than six months in protest against the three laws that they say will end state procurement of crops at MSP. The Supreme Court has put on hold the implementation of the three laws till further orders and set up a committee to find solutions.
"All political parties of the country wanted to bring the farm laws, but they could not gather courage to bring them. Modi government took this big step in the interest of farmers and brought reforms. Farmers got benefit of that in several parts of the country. But in the meantime farmers agitation started," Tomar said at a Cabinet briefing.
He said the government held 11 rounds of talks with farmers and Unions were asked about their objections in the laws and which provisions they think were against farmers.
"But neither leader of any political party gave its answer in the House (Parliament) nor any farmers' leader, and the talks did not move forward."
The minister said that the government is committed towards farmers and it also respects farmers.
"So, whenever farmers want discussions, Government of India will be ready for discussion. But we have repeatedly asked them to tell the objections in the provisions with logic. We will listen and find a solution," Tomar said.
Three union ministers, including Tomar and Food Minister Piyush Goyal, held 11 rounds of talks with the protesting farmer unions.
In the last meeting on January 22, the government's negotiations with 41 farmer groups hit a roadblock as the unions squarely rejected the Centre's proposal of putting the laws on suspension.
During the 10th round of talks held on January 20, the Centre had offered to suspend the laws for 1-1.5 years and form a joint committee to find solutions, in return for protesting farmers going back to their respective homes from Delhi's borders.
Farmer groups have alleged that these laws will end the mandi and MSP procurement systems and leave the farmers at the mercy of big corporates, even as the government has rejected these apprehensions as misplaced.
On January 11, the Supreme Court had stayed the implementation of the three laws till further orders and appointed a four-member panel to resolve the impasse. Bhartiya Kisan Union President Bhupinder Singh Mann had recused himself from the committee appointed by the apex court.
Shetkari Sanghatana (Maharashtra) President Anil Ghanwat and agriculture economists Pramod Kumar Joshi and Ashok Gulati are the other members on the panel. They have completed the consultation process with stakeholders.

ARTICLE 118
TITLE: FSSAI asks states to conduct inspections for enforcement of ban on blending of mustard oil 
URL: https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/economy/agri-business/fssai-asks-states-to-conduct-inspections-for-enforcement-of-ban-on-blending-of-mustard-oil/article34769123.ece

The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) has directed States to carry out inspection drives to ensure implementation of prohibition of blending of mustard oil. The norms that prohibit blending of mustard oil for production of multi-sourced edible vegetable oil (MSEVOs) came into effect from June 8.
In an order, the food safety authority has asked food safety commissioners of all States and UTs to conduct inspection drive of all units which were licensed for production of mustard blended edible vegetable oil and multi-sourced edible vegetable oil. The regulator said this will help in effective enforcement of the norms across the country.
“It is further advised to ensure physical inspection of such units by visiting their premises to ensure any prohibited blending of mustard oils is not being carried after June 08,” the order added.
It has also asked state food safety commissioners to approach players that had been issued licenses for mustard blending edible vegetable oil in the past and have old licenses to get their licenses suitably amended.
FSSAI has banned blending of mustard oil with other edible oils to ensure purity and safety of these products.
Published on June 9, 2021

ARTICLE 119
TITLE: Indore: Edible oil worth Rs 9.90L seized from Palda area, 11 samples taken from factory
URL: https://www.freepressjournal.in/indore/indore-edible-oil-worth-rs-990l-seized-from-palda-area-11-samples-taken-from-factory

Indore: A team of food and drug administration department conducted a surprise inspection of an edible oil repacking factory in the Palda area on Friday and found that the FSSAI number of the oil, imported from Nepal, was incorrect. The team seized edible oil worth Rs 9.90L.
The drug administration team carried out a surprise inspection of the factory called Mahendra Brothers located in Palda area on Friday afternoon. The team members took 11 samples of various food items from the factory. One of the owners of the firm Mahesh Gulwani was also present on the spot when the team of officials reached there.
The samples of the oil taken include Gold Refined Soybean Oil 500ml, MP No. One Refined Soybean Oil 400ml, Flavour Gold Refined Soybean Oil 5 Litre, Flavour Gold Refined Soybean Oil 15 Litre, MP No. 1 Refined Sunflower Oil 15 Litre, Sagar Gold Refined Palmolein Oil 500ml,
Healthy King Refined Soybean Oil, Samples of Surya Coconut Oil, Halo Refined Sunflower Oil, Siddha Baba Refined Soyabean Oil and Halo Refined Soyabean Oil 15 KG. The samples were taken under Food Safety and Standards Act 2006.
Besides this, the team also confiscated Surya Coconut Oil 2205 kg, Halo Refined Sunflower Oil (1 lit pouch) 2000 lit., Halo Refined Soyabean Oil (15 lit tin) 2175 lit. The total value of the confiscated oil is estimated Rs 9,90,925. This action was also carried out under the Food Safety and Standards Act 2006. The confiscated items were kept in the custody of the firm itself. Surya Coconut Oil, Halo Refined Sunflower Oil, Siddha Baba Refined Soyabean Oil, Halo Refined Soyabean Oil 15 kg were found to be manufactured in Nepal and imported into the country. Interestingly the importer's license number was found to be in 12 digits, whereas the license issued by FSSAI New Delhi is a 14 digit number.
Indore: Edible oil worth Rs 9.90L seized from Palda area, 11 samples taken from factory
RECENT STORIES
                        
                            Train Update! Four West Central Railway Trains Diverted Due To Third Line Commissioning Work
                            
                                
                            
                        
                    
                        
                            One Exam, One Last Chance: 16.5k Madhya Pradesh Students To Take CBSE Supplementary Test On July 15
                            
                                
                            
                        
                    
                        
                            Malwa’s Famous Garadu And Sailana Balam Cucumber Earn GI Recognition
                            
                                
                            
                        
                    
                        
                            'To Hamari Banayi Sadak Par Mat Chalo,' Says Urban Minister Kailash Vijayvargiya Over 'Qafir' Remark...
                            
                                
                            
                        
                    
                        
                            President Draupadi Murmu Concludes Five-Day Madhya Pradesh Visit; Chief Minister Mohan Yadav Bids He...

ARTICLE 120
TITLE: With pics - Arsh – FCS + FCS2 STRAP: Drive against ‘adulteration mafia’ in Indore: District FCS raids edible oil factory, petrol pump
URL: https://www.freepressjournal.in/indore/with-pics-arsh-fcs-fcs2strapdrive-against-adulteration-mafia-in-indore-district-fcs-raids-edible-oil-factory-petrol-pump

Indore: A team of the District Food and Civil Supply led by additional collector Abhay Bedekar, in a drive against ‘adulteration mafia’, conducted two drives in two areas under the Indore department jurisdiction on Saturday.
In one drive, conducted by the department along with the Crime Branch Department, over 3,550 litres of sub-standard oil was seized from the firm, Mamaji Industries, in the Palda area. The Crime Branch received a tip, following which the drive was conducted. In the drive, the operator of the industry, Ashok Agrawal, was found carrying out fraudulent activities by repackaging several types of oils in new bottles by adulterating the oil. The department took the samples of the oils and seized the entire material present in the factory.
Officials said they found that the company repackaged mustard, groundnut and soybean oil with its own brand, Morena Gold Kachi Ghani Oil, Active Live Soyabean Oil, Sun Active Sunflower Oil, Mamaji Groundnut Oil and Kathiabadi Groundnut. The repackaged oil packets were sent to dealers in Ujjain, Dewas, Khargone, Dhar and Indore.
In another drive, the team of the department raided Hans Travel’s petrol pump near Dhakkanwala Kuwa. The pump was selling biodiesel without permission. The team took samples of the petrol and diesel. Additional collector Bedekar said that a bio-diesel licence was required to carry out such activities. Action is being taken against those who are trading in it without a proper licence. Samples have been taken from the pump and action will be taken if issues were found with the samples.
Case registered against Go Gas owner
An FIR has been registered against four people in the Go Gas godown case in which gas was stored above the permissible quantity. The case has been registered against the agency’s territory manager, Ashok Soni, godown-in-charge Suraj Choudhary, godown keeper Lakhan and Sunil Solanki at the Rajendra Nagar police station.

ARTICLE 121
TITLE: Madhya Pradesh: Burnt palm oil seized from namkeen factory
URL: https://www.freepressjournal.in/ujjain/madhya-pradesh-burnt-palm-oil-seized-from-namkeen-factory

Ujjain (Madhya Pradesh): During an inspection Grave irregularity came to fore at Anjushree Namkeen Factory in Bapunagar in Ujjain on Sunday.
The team of officials found that sev was spread on the ground in unhygienic conditions. From preparations to packaging of the namkeen the factory operator was found grossly compromising health standards.
Not only this, there was no pest control in the room where the sev was being made. Ahead of the festivals, the team of Food Department inspected the Namkeen manufacturing units.
Samples of namkeen, palm oil, gram flour and flour were collected. Another unit- Ratlami Namkeen on Agar Road was also inspected. Samples of sev, chili powder and gram flour were collected. Samples have been sent to the state laboratory for examination.

ARTICLE 122
TITLE: Vigilance officials conduct raids to check hoarding of edible oil
URL: https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Visakhapatnam/vigilance-officials-conduct-raids-to-check-hoarding-of-edible-oil/article65202544.ece

Officials of the Vigilance and Enforcement Wing conducted raids on the hoarding of edible oil by unscrupulous traders at various places in the city and district, on Monday.
They found that a wholesaler had unauthorisedly stored 47,141 litres of cooking oil. It’s value is estimated at ₹50 lakh. The oil was seized and a criminal case was booked against the accused wholesaler. Raids were also conducted Yelamanchili, Anakapalle and Poorna Market areas in the city and a total of 17 cases were booked.
The raids were conducted by Vigilance CI Koteswara Rao and his team under the guidance of Vigilance and Enforcement Additional SP G. Swaruparani. Officials of the Civil Supplies Department and Food and Safety Department also participated in the raids.
Published - March 07, 2022 11:42 pm IST

ARTICLE 123
TITLE: Edible oil worth Rs 6.3 cr seized in raids
URL: https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/andhra-pradesh/2022/mar/19/edible-oil-worth-rs-63-cr-seized-in-raids-2431767.html

NELLORE: Vigilance and Enforcement officials, in coordination with the Civil Supplies and Legal Metrology departments, have seized 274 metric tonnes of edible oil worth Rs 6.30 crore after conducting raids on traders in the district. They are planning to release the seized stocks into the market to overcome the shortage of edible oil.
Taking advantage of the Russia-Ukraine war, several unscrupulous traders have resorted to hoarding and black marketing of edible oil and other commodities, thus creating an artificial scarcity of the essentials. As a result, the prices of edible oil have gone up by Rs 20 to Rs 40 per litre. As a measure to curb hoarding and black marketing of edible oil and other essentials, the vigilance and enforcement officials have intensified raids on traders.
Vigilance and Enforcement SP Rajeshwar Reddy said, “Consumers can contact the authorities on phone Nos 94401 68585, 93981 45857 and 98858 86947 to lodge complaints about unfair trade practices. Swift action will be taken against hoarders of essential goods.”

ARTICLE 124
TITLE: Edible oil traders booked, stocks worth ₹29 crore seized in surprise raids in Andhra Pradesh    
URL: https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/andhra-pradesh/edible-oil-traders-booked-stocks-worth-29-crore-seized-in-surprise-raids-in-andhra-pradesh/article65243587.ece

Officials of the Legal Metrology, Vigilance and Enforcement, Food Safety, and Civil Supplies departments have booked 930 cases against traders for allegedly selling edible oils at high prices and keeping stocks illegally.
“The raids have been conducted in the last 15 days. Surprise checks have been conducted at 1,890 places in the State,” said Director General (Vigilance and Enforcement) Sankhabrata Bagchi.
Addressing the media here on Sunday, he said 59 cases were booked under Section 6A of the Essential Commodities Act for maintaining excess stocks; 889 cases under various provisions of the Legal Metrology (LM) Act, 2009; LM Package Commodities Rules, 2011, for selling oils at high prices; and 38 cases under Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006, for selling stocks without possessing licence.
‘Duplicate brands’
Several criminal cases were registered against the traders for selling local brands in the name of reputed brands, the DG said.
“In all, the officials have seized about 1,660 tonnes of stocks worth about ₹29 crore. More than 100 teams are taking part in the inspections, and the joint raids will continue,” Mr. Bagchi said.
V&E Director Shemushi Bajpai, who is monitoring the raids, said 15 cases were booked in Ongole, 10 in East Godavari, nine in Guntur, six in West Godavari, four each in Nellore and Kurnool, three in Visakhapatnam, and two each in Ananthapur, Kadapa and Krishna districts.
“The government is proposing to bind over habitual offenders who are resorting to duplicating edible oils, hoarding, and selling oils in the black market. We have seized several brands of oils and new stocks,” the DG said.
“People can lodge complaints related to V&E through WhatsApp No. 9440906254,” he added.
Published - March 20, 2022 08:13 pm IST

ARTICLE 125
TITLE: Vigilance raids edible oil hoarders across Andhra Pradesh | Vigilance raids edible oil hoarders across Andhra Pradesh
URL: https://www.deccanchronicle.com/nation/current-affairs/210322/ap-launches-raids-on-illegal-hoarding-of-oil.html

Government starts selling oils at fair prices in Rythu Bazaars and asked the people to make good use of the facility
VIJAYAWADA: Vigilance and Enforcement ADG Shankabrata Bagchi said on Sunday that the agency is holding massive raids all over AP against hoarding of refined edible oils and illegal sale of oils at exorbitant prices in the context of the Russia-Ukraine war.
He said the agency conducted 1890 raids and registered 994 cases for violation of norms. “We have started a WhatsApp number and appealed to the people to give information about the hoarding and excessive charging of rates for oils,” he said.
Complaints can be sent to the 9440906254 WhatsApp number. Meanwhile, the government started selling oils at fair prices in Rythu Bazaars and asked the people to make good use of the facility.
Addressing the media, Bagchi said stern action will be taken against those found hoarding of and doing black marketing in edible oils.
Surprise checks were carried out at 1890 wholesalers and supermarkets across the state and 59 cases have been registered under the essential commodities Act. Hoarded stocks were seized.
“About 889 cases were registered and stocks seized for selling edible oils at more than the MRP, 38 cases were filed under food safety act and 8 criminal cases were registered for adulteration during the last one month.”
He said that 5.67 tonnes of Priya brand edible oil stocks was seized in Krishna district. One case was registered in Srikakulam and 56.624 metric tonnes of edible oil worth Rs 93 lakh seized there. Three cases were registered in Visakhapatnam and 164.434 metric tonnes of oil worth Rs 2.67 crore was seized.
In East Godavari, 10 cases were registered and 181.100 metric tonnes of oil worth Rs 3.43 crore was seized.
In West Godavari, six cases were registered and 91.327 metric tonnes of oil worth 11.43 crore seized. In Krishna district, nine cases were registered and 57.687 metric tonnes worth `86 lakh was seized.
In Guntur district, nine cases were registered and edible oil worth Rs 4.51 crore seized. In Ongole, 15 cases were registered and 151.375 metric tonnes of oil worth Rs 2.28 crore seized.
In Nellore, four cases were registered and oil worth Rs 6.30 crore was seized. In Chittoor, one case was registered and material worth Rs 33 lakh seized.
In Kadapa district, two cases were registered and 53.15 metric tonnes worth Rs 82 lakhs was seized. In Anantapur district, 2 cases were registered and 125.272 metric tonnes worth Rs 1.96 crore was seized. In Kurnool district, 4 cases were registered and 134 tonnes worth ` 2.91 crore was seized.

ARTICLE 126
TITLE: Vigilance raids edible oil units in Andhra Pradesh | Vigilance raids edible oil units in Andhra Pradesh
URL: https://www.deccanchronicle.com/nation/in-other-news/250322/vigilance-raids-edible-oil-units-in-state.html

Vigilance officials said they have been continuing checks since Mar 6 to curb hoarding of oils by traders in the backdrop of war in Ukraine
VIJAYAWADA: AP Vigilance and Enforcement Department conducted surprise checks on traders of palmolein and other edible oils throughout the state.
Vigilance officials said they have been continuing checks since March 6 to curb hoarding of oils by traders in the backdrop of war in Ukraine. As many as 3,036 wholesalers, retailers, supermarkets and manufacturers have been inspected. 67 cases have been registered under Essential Commodities Act, 1,371 cases under Legal Metrology Act 2009 and Legal Metrology Packaged Commodities Rules 2011, and 43 cases under Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. In addition, nine criminal cases have been filed.
Vigilance and Enforcement Department has warned wholesale/retail traders, supermarkets and manufacturing units against hoarding palmolein and other edible oils, which could lead to artificial scarcity and result in rise in prices. Otherwise, appropriate action, including criminal cases, could be launched against them, officials warned.

ARTICLE 127
TITLE: 332 edible oil traders raided across Andhra Pradesh
URL: https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/andhra-pradesh/2022/mar/27/332-edible-oil-traders-raided-across-andhra-pradesh-2434670.html

VIJAYAWADA: Continuing the raids to curb irregularities such as illegal hoarding of edible oil and sales above MRP, sleuths of Vigilance and Enforcement department conducted surprise checks on 332 wholesale, retail traders, supermarkets and manufacturing units on Saturday.
During the inspections, the officials found various violations and filed two cases under section 6A of the Edible and Commodities Act, 1955, 126 cases under the Legal Metrology Act, 2009, five cases under the FSSAI Act and two criminal cases for selling substandard food items to the public.
In all, 3,780 surprise checks were carried out in the State from March 6 to 25; 68 cases were registered under Section 6A of the Essential and Commodities Act, 1955, 1,636 cases under the Legal Metrology Act, 2009.

ARTICLE 128
TITLE: Hold surprise raids on edible oil traders: Karumuri Venkata Nageswara Rao
URL: https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/andhra-pradesh/2022/apr/27/hold-surprise-raids-on-edible-oil-traders-karumuri-venkata-nageswara-rao-2447010.html

VIJAYAWADA: Civil Supplies Minister Karumuri Venkata Nageswara Rao has directed officials concerned to initiate stern action against traders caught selling edible oil at high prices. On Tuesday, the minister discussed steps that need to be taken to arrest the price rise of edible oil. He asked the Vigilance and Enforcement (V&E) officials to conduct surprise checks and register bind over cases if traders are found guilty of unauthorised stockpiling or creating artificial shortage of edible oil.
“It is the responsibility of the department to make sure that the general public are not affected, and that traders do not hike the rates of edible oil and other essentials. Special stalls should be set up at Rythu Bazars and municipal markets to ensure oil are sold below the market price,” Nageswara Rao added.
The minister further said that based on the reports provided by the planning department, zonal-wise cooking oil rates should be monitored by the authorities at all times. Also, the officials must have good understanding of the situation and take decisions from time to time.
The civil supplies officials were also asked to hold meetings with manufacturers, leading brands, importers and suppliers. “Chief Minister YS Jagan Mohan Reddy wants to ensure that non-profits offer affordable prices to consumers, so that authorities can take steps to control the rise in prices.”
Civil Supplies Corporation VC and MDVeerapandian, V&E director general, ex-officio and principal secretary Shankha Brata Bagchi, Principal Secretary (Marketing Corporation) Madhusudan Reddy, AP Oilfed VC and MD C Babu Rao were also present.
‘Use soya, rice oil’
“AP Oilfed offers Vijaya’s cooking oil in all Rythu Bazars, which should be sold to the public at a price lower than the market price... As there are restrictions on palm oil import, people should be encouraged to use soybean and rice oil,” the civil supplies minister said

ARTICLE 129
TITLE: GST wing raids edible oil producing units in Odisha
URL: https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/odisha/2022/may/19/gst-wing-raids-edible-oil-producing-units-in-odisha-2455369.html

BHUBANESWAR: The State CT and GST enforcement wing conducted simultaneous raids on seven rice bran oil producing on Wednesday.
The inspection conducted following allegations that oil extraction plants are purchasing raw materials out of account and selling the rice bran oil produced out of the same without issue of tax invoice in order to evade payment of tax.
The enforcement wing identified seven producers located in Sambalpur, Bargarh and Kalahandi and conducted simultaneous raids at their producing units, place of business and godowns.
Preliminary investigation revealed these manufacturers have paid very negligible amount of differential tax on their sales despite having huge turnover. The units are also not reversing ITC on exempted sales leading to non-payment of legitimate tax due to excess claim of ITC.
"The investigating teams are verifying purchase and sale details, manufacturing account and the information available in computers and laptops. They are also recording the physical stock available on their business premises and godown for cross verification with books of accounts," said a senior tax official.

ARTICLE 130
TITLE: Centre Conducts Raids In Several States Over Hoarding Of Edible Oil
URL: https://www.businessworld.in/article/Centre-Conducts-Raids-In-Several-States-Over-Hoarding-Of-Edible-Oil/27-05-2022-430461

Former Uttar Pradesh Chief Secretary and author Alok Ranjan argues that India’s development journey must move beyond economic output to focus on happiness, quality of life, education, healthcare and inclusive growth
India's big securities fraud charge was built by comparing a gold refinery's gross sales turnover to its processing margin alone — and SEBI's own order contains the table that makes the question unavoidable. Then comes the ex-parte action after 20 months of open investigation, a forensic audit conducted on 2% of the evidence, and directions so mild they barely register the severity of the charge.
SEBI's own document defeats SEBI. The regulator has advanced India's largest securities allegation while its own order cannot specify what, exactly, it is charging.
Meta will acquire about a 20 per cent minority stake in CRED and Shah will step down from his operating role as chief executive officer of CRED and join Meta’s global leadership team
The index of eight core industries (ICI) increased by 0.5 per cent in May 2026, as compared to a final growth rate of 1.8 per cent in April 2026
The Union Budget 2026–27 allocated Rs 1,000 crore toward India Semiconductor Mission (ISM) 2.0, while the government has already approved 10 ISM projects worth Rs 1.60 lakh crore across six states. India’s semiconductor market is also projected to reach $100–110 billion by 2030, underlining the scale of the opportunity ahead
Former Uttar Pradesh Chief Secretary and author Alok Ranjan argues that India’s development journey must move beyond economic output to focus on happiness, quality of life, education, healthcare and inclusive growth
India's big securities fraud charge was built by comparing a gold refinery's gross sales turnover to its processing margin alone — and SEBI's own order contains the table that makes the question unavoidable. Then comes the ex-parte action after 20 months of open investigation, a forensic audit conducted on 2% of the evidence, and directions so mild they barely register the severity of the charge.
SEBI's own document defeats SEBI. The regulator has advanced India's largest securities allegation while its own order cannot specify what, exactly, it is charging.
Meta will acquire about a 20 per cent minority stake in CRED and Shah will step down from his operating role as chief executive officer of CRED and join Meta’s global leadership team
The index of eight core industries (ICI) increased by 0.5 per cent in May 2026, as compared to a final growth rate of 1.8 per cent in April 2026
The Union Budget 2026–27 allocated Rs 1,000 crore toward India Semiconductor Mission (ISM) 2.0, while the government has already approved 10 ISM projects worth Rs 1.60 lakh crore across six states. India’s semiconductor market is also projected to reach $100–110 billion by 2030, underlining the scale of the opportunity ahead
Former Uttar Pradesh Chief Secretary and author Alok Ranjan argues that India’s development journey must move beyond economic output to focus on happiness, quality of life, education, healthcare and inclusive growth
India's big securities fraud charge was built by comparing a gold refinery's gross sales turnover to its processing margin alone — and SEBI's own order contains the table that makes the question unavoidable. Then comes the ex-parte action after 20 months of open investigation, a forensic audit conducted on 2% of the evidence, and directions so mild they barely register the severity of the charge.
SEBI's own document defeats SEBI. The regulator has advanced India's largest securities allegation while its own order cannot specify what, exactly, it is charging.
Former Uttar Pradesh Chief Secretary and author Alok Ranjan argues that India’s development journey must move beyond economic output to focus on happiness, quality of life, education, healthcare and inclusive growth
Raj Thackeray Entered The Kohinoor Deal When The Money Came In. He Left Before It Burned And Losses Came In. ED questioned him for 8.5 hours. Maharashtra Is Still Waiting For An Explanation. Raj Thackeray's Kohinoor story remains one of Maharashtra’s least examined financial mysteries.
Subscribe to our newsletter to get updates on our latest news
Subscribe to our newsletter to get updates on our latest news

ARTICLE 131
TITLE: Khargone: Edible oil worth Rs 50 lakh seized
URL: https://www.freepressjournal.in/indore/khargone-edible-oil-worth-rs-50-lakh-seized

Khargone (Madhya Pradesh): In a major crackdown on those involved in hoarding, a joint team of five departments led by deputy collector Omnarayan Singh conducted raids at shops and godowns of Gurukrupa Traders Bistan road and seized edible oil worth Rs 50,11,174. Officials involved in the raid admitted that this is the biggest action on a single establishment in the district so far.
Revenue, Mandi, Weights and Measures, Labour, Food Security and Food Supply departments were involved in the raid conducted on the directions of district collector Kumar Purushottam.
Besides edible oil, the team also found 135.69 quintals of illegal wheat. Whereas it is suspected that 1774 quintals of wheat have been stored without permission.
Deputy collector Singh said that business is allowed, but there is doubt on the permission to store.
During the investigation, it came to light that the repacking of oil is also done by the traders. Not only this, three weighing machines were not found to be verified in the investigation done by the Measurement Department. Apart from this, MRP has also been tampered with on five oil cans of 15 litres each.
During this action deputy collector Singh, food supply officer Manohar Thakur, assistant food inspector Bharat Jamre, food safety officer RR Solanki, HL Avasya, RR Solanki, measurement officer Pathak, labour officer Shailendra Solanki and their teams were present.

ARTICLE 132
TITLE: Food Safety dept. initiative to check reuse of cooking oil in hotels 
URL: https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Kochi/food-safety-dept-initiative-to-check-reuse-of-cooking-oil-in-hotels/article65644073.ece

The Department of Food Safety has plans to convert used cooking oil in hotels as raw material for producing biodiesel as part of efforts to check its reuse.
The department will hand over the used cooking oil to companies involved in manufacturing biofuel. Hotel owners will receive compensation for handing over the used oil to the department, according to an official release.
The government has permitted three firms to procure used oil. The authorities are hopeful that the project would help in checking the reuse of oil for cooking in hotels as it would cause health problems.
Published - July 16, 2022 02:11 am IST

ARTICLE 133
TITLE: Delhi Govt Carries Out Drive Against Edible Oil Adulteration
URL: https://www.businessworld.in/article/Delhi-Govt-Carries-Out-Drive-Against-Edible-Oil-Adulteration-/13-08-2022-442029

Former Uttar Pradesh Chief Secretary and author Alok Ranjan argues that India’s development journey must move beyond economic output to focus on happiness, quality of life, education, healthcare and inclusive growth
India's big securities fraud charge was built by comparing a gold refinery's gross sales turnover to its processing margin alone — and SEBI's own order contains the table that makes the question unavoidable. Then comes the ex-parte action after 20 months of open investigation, a forensic audit conducted on 2% of the evidence, and directions so mild they barely register the severity of the charge.
SEBI's own document defeats SEBI. The regulator has advanced India's largest securities allegation while its own order cannot specify what, exactly, it is charging.
Meta will acquire about a 20 per cent minority stake in CRED and Shah will step down from his operating role as chief executive officer of CRED and join Meta’s global leadership team
The index of eight core industries (ICI) increased by 0.5 per cent in May 2026, as compared to a final growth rate of 1.8 per cent in April 2026
The Union Budget 2026–27 allocated Rs 1,000 crore toward India Semiconductor Mission (ISM) 2.0, while the government has already approved 10 ISM projects worth Rs 1.60 lakh crore across six states. India’s semiconductor market is also projected to reach $100–110 billion by 2030, underlining the scale of the opportunity ahead
Former Uttar Pradesh Chief Secretary and author Alok Ranjan argues that India’s development journey must move beyond economic output to focus on happiness, quality of life, education, healthcare and inclusive growth
India's big securities fraud charge was built by comparing a gold refinery's gross sales turnover to its processing margin alone — and SEBI's own order contains the table that makes the question unavoidable. Then comes the ex-parte action after 20 months of open investigation, a forensic audit conducted on 2% of the evidence, and directions so mild they barely register the severity of the charge.
SEBI's own document defeats SEBI. The regulator has advanced India's largest securities allegation while its own order cannot specify what, exactly, it is charging.
Meta will acquire about a 20 per cent minority stake in CRED and Shah will step down from his operating role as chief executive officer of CRED and join Meta’s global leadership team
The index of eight core industries (ICI) increased by 0.5 per cent in May 2026, as compared to a final growth rate of 1.8 per cent in April 2026
The Union Budget 2026–27 allocated Rs 1,000 crore toward India Semiconductor Mission (ISM) 2.0, while the government has already approved 10 ISM projects worth Rs 1.60 lakh crore across six states. India’s semiconductor market is also projected to reach $100–110 billion by 2030, underlining the scale of the opportunity ahead
Former Uttar Pradesh Chief Secretary and author Alok Ranjan argues that India’s development journey must move beyond economic output to focus on happiness, quality of life, education, healthcare and inclusive growth
India's big securities fraud charge was built by comparing a gold refinery's gross sales turnover to its processing margin alone — and SEBI's own order contains the table that makes the question unavoidable. Then comes the ex-parte action after 20 months of open investigation, a forensic audit conducted on 2% of the evidence, and directions so mild they barely register the severity of the charge.
SEBI's own document defeats SEBI. The regulator has advanced India's largest securities allegation while its own order cannot specify what, exactly, it is charging.
Former Uttar Pradesh Chief Secretary and author Alok Ranjan argues that India’s development journey must move beyond economic output to focus on happiness, quality of life, education, healthcare and inclusive growth
Raj Thackeray Entered The Kohinoor Deal When The Money Came In. He Left Before It Burned And Losses Came In. ED questioned him for 8.5 hours. Maharashtra Is Still Waiting For An Explanation. Raj Thackeray's Kohinoor story remains one of Maharashtra’s least examined financial mysteries.
Subscribe to our newsletter to get updates on our latest news
Subscribe to our newsletter to get updates on our latest news

ARTICLE 134
TITLE: AGMARK certification not required for imported blended edible oil: FSSAI 
URL: https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/economy/agmark-certification-not-required-for-imported-blended-edible-oil-fssai/article65783272.ece

The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) has decided to do away with the requirement for imported food consignments of blended edible vegetable oil products to carry AGMARK certification.
This decision comes after the food safety authority received representations from industry stakeholders seeking clarity on whether AGMARK certification will be required for blended edible vegetable oil products that are imported.
According to the regulations,food business operators must obtain AGMARK certification to sell blended edible vegetable oil products (BEVO) in the country in addition to obtaining a valid FSSAI license. AGMARK is a certification mark for agricultural produce that assures consumers that the product conforms to standards notified by the Directorate of Marketing & Inspection (DMI), which is part of the Agriculture Ministry.
Why the earlier advisory
In 2020, the FSSAI had raised concerns that a large number of blended edible oil manufacturers had obtained FSSAI licenses without the mandatory AGMARK certification. It had also observed that some food business operators were also selling blended edible oil products without the requisite FSSAI licenses. It had issued an advisory on requirement of AGMARK certification prior to import of blended edible vegetable oils. The food authority had also directed state food safety commissioners to initiate action against those manufacturers that were selling blended edible vegetable oils without AGMARK certification mark and FSSAI license.
In its latest advisory issued on Thursday, the FSSAI said it received representations from various industry stakeholders on the issue of applicability of requirement of AGMARK certification in case of imported food products. “The matter was taken up with the DMI (Directorate of Marketing & Inspection) and it has been informed that foreign country/ overseas certification under Agricultural Produce (Grading and Marking) Act 1937 is not carried out by DMI,” the FSSAI noted.
It added that it has therefore decided to “keep the requirement of AGMARK certification for imported food consignment in abeyance till further orders.”
Published on August 18, 2022

ARTICLE 135
TITLE: FDA Cracks Down On Loose Sale Of Edible Oil
URL: https://www.businessworld.in/article/FDA-Cracks-Down-On-Loose-Sale-Of-Edible-Oil-/04-10-2022-449313

Former Uttar Pradesh Chief Secretary and author Alok Ranjan argues that India’s development journey must move beyond economic output to focus on happiness, quality of life, education, healthcare and inclusive growth
India's big securities fraud charge was built by comparing a gold refinery's gross sales turnover to its processing margin alone — and SEBI's own order contains the table that makes the question unavoidable. Then comes the ex-parte action after 20 months of open investigation, a forensic audit conducted on 2% of the evidence, and directions so mild they barely register the severity of the charge.
SEBI's own document defeats SEBI. The regulator has advanced India's largest securities allegation while its own order cannot specify what, exactly, it is charging.
Meta will acquire about a 20 per cent minority stake in CRED and Shah will step down from his operating role as chief executive officer of CRED and join Meta’s global leadership team
The index of eight core industries (ICI) increased by 0.5 per cent in May 2026, as compared to a final growth rate of 1.8 per cent in April 2026
The Union Budget 2026–27 allocated Rs 1,000 crore toward India Semiconductor Mission (ISM) 2.0, while the government has already approved 10 ISM projects worth Rs 1.60 lakh crore across six states. India’s semiconductor market is also projected to reach $100–110 billion by 2030, underlining the scale of the opportunity ahead
Former Uttar Pradesh Chief Secretary and author Alok Ranjan argues that India’s development journey must move beyond economic output to focus on happiness, quality of life, education, healthcare and inclusive growth
India's big securities fraud charge was built by comparing a gold refinery's gross sales turnover to its processing margin alone — and SEBI's own order contains the table that makes the question unavoidable. Then comes the ex-parte action after 20 months of open investigation, a forensic audit conducted on 2% of the evidence, and directions so mild they barely register the severity of the charge.
SEBI's own document defeats SEBI. The regulator has advanced India's largest securities allegation while its own order cannot specify what, exactly, it is charging.
Meta will acquire about a 20 per cent minority stake in CRED and Shah will step down from his operating role as chief executive officer of CRED and join Meta’s global leadership team
The index of eight core industries (ICI) increased by 0.5 per cent in May 2026, as compared to a final growth rate of 1.8 per cent in April 2026
The Union Budget 2026–27 allocated Rs 1,000 crore toward India Semiconductor Mission (ISM) 2.0, while the government has already approved 10 ISM projects worth Rs 1.60 lakh crore across six states. India’s semiconductor market is also projected to reach $100–110 billion by 2030, underlining the scale of the opportunity ahead
Former Uttar Pradesh Chief Secretary and author Alok Ranjan argues that India’s development journey must move beyond economic output to focus on happiness, quality of life, education, healthcare and inclusive growth
India's big securities fraud charge was built by comparing a gold refinery's gross sales turnover to its processing margin alone — and SEBI's own order contains the table that makes the question unavoidable. Then comes the ex-parte action after 20 months of open investigation, a forensic audit conducted on 2% of the evidence, and directions so mild they barely register the severity of the charge.
SEBI's own document defeats SEBI. The regulator has advanced India's largest securities allegation while its own order cannot specify what, exactly, it is charging.
Former Uttar Pradesh Chief Secretary and author Alok Ranjan argues that India’s development journey must move beyond economic output to focus on happiness, quality of life, education, healthcare and inclusive growth
Raj Thackeray Entered The Kohinoor Deal When The Money Came In. He Left Before It Burned And Losses Came In. ED questioned him for 8.5 hours. Maharashtra Is Still Waiting For An Explanation. Raj Thackeray's Kohinoor story remains one of Maharashtra’s least examined financial mysteries.
Subscribe to our newsletter to get updates on our latest news
Subscribe to our newsletter to get updates on our latest news

ARTICLE 136
TITLE: FSSAI directs officers to not delay clearance of imported pulses and edible oil consignments  
URL: https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/economy/fssai-directs-officers-to-not-delay-clearance-of-imported-pulses-and-edible-oil-consignments/article66600123.ece

The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) has directed regional directors and authorised officers to clear imported consignments of pulses and edible oils in a timely manner at the country’s ports.
This comes after it received a reference from the Agricultural Ministry and Consumer Affairs Ministry for the facilitation of timely processing and clearance of imported consignment of food grains including pulses and crude oil of edible grade.
In an order released on March 7, FSSAI said, “All Authorised officers are directed to facilitate and carry out food import clearance process of all such imported consignments without delay.”
It also directed authorised officers to issue a provisional no objection certificate after visual inspection for imported food consignments.
Also read: India’s agriculture exports jump 10% in Apr-Jan FY23; rice shipments surge 16%
“Authorised Officers are directed to carry out a visual inspection and upon satisfactory visual inspection, shall draw samples and issue Provisional No Objection Certificate (P-NOC) without waiting for the analysis report from the laboratory. On receipt of the analysis report from the laboratory, the Authorised Officer shall issue the final No Objection Certificate, if product conforms to the FSSAI standards,” the order added.
In December, the Center decided to extend the free imports of urad and tur daals by one year till March 31, 2024. Earlier this month, it also decided to remove basic customs duty on whole tur daal. These are part of the various measures being taken by the government to augment the domestic availability of lentils and keep the prices stable of these essential food commodities.
Importers will need to submit a declaration that the imported food consignments will be kept in a storage facility and not released in the market prior to issuance of a no objection certificate.
Published on March 10, 2023

ARTICLE 137
TITLE: Keep tabs on adulteration in edible oils, cautions food safety authority   
URL: https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/economy/agri-business/keep-tabs-on-adulteration-in-edible-oils-cautions-food-safety-authority/article66766803.ece

G Kamala Vardhana Ro, Chief Executive Officer of FSSAI (Food and Safety Standards Authority of India), has cautioned the edible oils industry against counterfeit products. “India witnesses a lot of adulteration in food products, this needs to be stopped,” he said.
Addressing the seventh International Conference on Rice Bran Oil (ICRBO)-2023 here on Saturday, he called for increasing the production of oil crops and extraction. “This will help reduce prices and enhance consumption of rice bran oil,” he said.
“India has a huge edible oils import bill. The government is increasing excise duties on some edible oils to encourage the use of domestic oils. Rice bran oil can help bridge the gap,” he said.
The three-day ICRBO 2023 has been jointly organised by the International Association of Rice Bran Oil (IARBO) and the Solvent Extractors’ Association of India (SEA). About 500 delegates from the industry and research institutions attended the conference, besides delegates from China, Thailand, Japan, Vietnam and Bangladesh.
The conference is aimed at taking stock of rice bran oil production in the world and preparing a plan of action to promote the ‘healthy oil’.
Jayesh Ranjan, Principal Secretary (IT and Industries, Telangana), said the State had become a leader in paddy production in the last eight years.
“The State has chalked out plans to divert some paddy area to oil palm and cover 20 lakh acres in the next few four years. It will help the country reduce dependence on imports,” he said.
In recognition of their services to the rice bran oil ecosystem, ‘Lifetime Achievement Awards’ were conferred on O. P. Goenka, who is considered the father of Rice Bran Oil In India; V. Prakash (Scientific contribution for promoting RBO as edible oil); R B N Prasad (for his contribution in the development of enzymatic degumming process); A R Sharma (for his pioneering role in promoting the branded RBO; Xuebing Xu (for contributions in value addition); and Riantong Singanusong ( Founder of IARBO and ICRBO and Product development of Rice Bran (Thailand).
“There are some challenges that the industry needs to address. We need to develop technologies to reduce losses in storage and processing, and minimise the loss of micronutrients,” Ashok Sethia, President of IARBO, said.
India’s contribution
B V Mehta, Secretary-General of IARBO, said India was the second largest producer of rice in the world, and the largest producer of RBO, with a production base of 1.05 million tonnes.
Published on April 22, 2023

ARTICLE 138
TITLE: Income Tax Dept Raids Edible Oil Business Group In Bengal Assam
URL: https://www.businessworld.in/article/Income-Tax-Dept-Raids-Edible-Oil-Business-Group-In-Bengal-Assam/17-05-2023-476941

Former Uttar Pradesh Chief Secretary and author Alok Ranjan argues that India’s development journey must move beyond economic output to focus on happiness, quality of life, education, healthcare and inclusive growth
India's big securities fraud charge was built by comparing a gold refinery's gross sales turnover to its processing margin alone — and SEBI's own order contains the table that makes the question unavoidable. Then comes the ex-parte action after 20 months of open investigation, a forensic audit conducted on 2% of the evidence, and directions so mild they barely register the severity of the charge.
SEBI's own document defeats SEBI. The regulator has advanced India's largest securities allegation while its own order cannot specify what, exactly, it is charging.
Meta will acquire about a 20 per cent minority stake in CRED and Shah will step down from his operating role as chief executive officer of CRED and join Meta’s global leadership team
The index of eight core industries (ICI) increased by 0.5 per cent in May 2026, as compared to a final growth rate of 1.8 per cent in April 2026
The Union Budget 2026–27 allocated Rs 1,000 crore toward India Semiconductor Mission (ISM) 2.0, while the government has already approved 10 ISM projects worth Rs 1.60 lakh crore across six states. India’s semiconductor market is also projected to reach $100–110 billion by 2030, underlining the scale of the opportunity ahead
Former Uttar Pradesh Chief Secretary and author Alok Ranjan argues that India’s development journey must move beyond economic output to focus on happiness, quality of life, education, healthcare and inclusive growth
India's big securities fraud charge was built by comparing a gold refinery's gross sales turnover to its processing margin alone — and SEBI's own order contains the table that makes the question unavoidable. Then comes the ex-parte action after 20 months of open investigation, a forensic audit conducted on 2% of the evidence, and directions so mild they barely register the severity of the charge.
SEBI's own document defeats SEBI. The regulator has advanced India's largest securities allegation while its own order cannot specify what, exactly, it is charging.
Meta will acquire about a 20 per cent minority stake in CRED and Shah will step down from his operating role as chief executive officer of CRED and join Meta’s global leadership team
The index of eight core industries (ICI) increased by 0.5 per cent in May 2026, as compared to a final growth rate of 1.8 per cent in April 2026
The Union Budget 2026–27 allocated Rs 1,000 crore toward India Semiconductor Mission (ISM) 2.0, while the government has already approved 10 ISM projects worth Rs 1.60 lakh crore across six states. India’s semiconductor market is also projected to reach $100–110 billion by 2030, underlining the scale of the opportunity ahead
Former Uttar Pradesh Chief Secretary and author Alok Ranjan argues that India’s development journey must move beyond economic output to focus on happiness, quality of life, education, healthcare and inclusive growth
India's big securities fraud charge was built by comparing a gold refinery's gross sales turnover to its processing margin alone — and SEBI's own order contains the table that makes the question unavoidable. Then comes the ex-parte action after 20 months of open investigation, a forensic audit conducted on 2% of the evidence, and directions so mild they barely register the severity of the charge.
SEBI's own document defeats SEBI. The regulator has advanced India's largest securities allegation while its own order cannot specify what, exactly, it is charging.
Former Uttar Pradesh Chief Secretary and author Alok Ranjan argues that India’s development journey must move beyond economic output to focus on happiness, quality of life, education, healthcare and inclusive growth
Raj Thackeray Entered The Kohinoor Deal When The Money Came In. He Left Before It Burned And Losses Came In. ED questioned him for 8.5 hours. Maharashtra Is Still Waiting For An Explanation. Raj Thackeray's Kohinoor story remains one of Maharashtra’s least examined financial mysteries.
Subscribe to our newsletter to get updates on our latest news
Subscribe to our newsletter to get updates on our latest news

ARTICLE 139
TITLE: 4,500 litres of edible oil manufactured under unhygienic conditions seized at two private units in Tiruchi
URL: https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Tiruchirapalli/4500-litres-of-edible-oil-manufactured-under-unhygienic-conditions-seized-at-two-private-units-in-tiruchi/article66904645.ece

A team from the Food Safety and Drug Administration Department here seized 4,500 litres of edible oil from two private oil manufacturing units in Tiruchi city on Saturday after finding them manufacturing edible oil under unhygienic conditions and without any proper registers.
The manufacture of edible oil and its sale have been temporarily stopped and food samples lifted for booking cases against them.
A press release from the Designated Officer, Food Safety, Tiruchi, Dr. R. Ramesh Babu, said the two units functioning on the West Bouleward Road were subjected to continuous checks and food samples lifted from them.
Several cases were booked in the past against the two units which had failed to rectify the deficiencies in spite of notice having been issued. The department served a “Stop Sale Notice” to the two units on April 6.
However, it came to light that the two units continued to manufacture edible oil without adhering to labelling of the Food Safety Department and without following the norms for manufacture, besides under unhygienic conditions.
Consequently, checks were conducted at the two units and manufacture of edible oil and their sale were temporarily stopped, the release said.
Published - May 28, 2023 07:31 pm IST

ARTICLE 140
TITLE: McDonald's Under Scrutiny After Maha FDA Finds It Replacing Cheese With Vegetable Oil In Products; Fast Food Chain Issues Clarification
URL: https://www.freepressjournal.in/mumbai/mcdonalds-under-scrutiny-after-maharashtra-fda-finds-fast-food-chain-replacing-cheese-with-vegetable-oil-in-products

Mumbai: The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has taken decisive action against fast-food behemoth McDonald's, alleging deceptive practices concerning the use of substitutes instead of authentic cheese in their burgers and nuggets, as per a report by TOI.
In response to the FDA's allegations, the license of a McDonald's outlet in Ahmednagar has been suspended, compelling the chain to eliminate the term 'cheese' from various menu items.
FDA's Allegations Against McDonald's
The FDA contends that McDonald's employed cheese analogues without adequate disclosure, thereby misleading consumers into believing they were consuming genuine cheese.
Cheese analogues, engineered to mimic the taste and texture of traditional dairy cheese, often replace dairy fat with more economical vegetable oil.
Allegedly, McDonald's failed to divulge the use of cheese analogues on food labels or electronic display boards, potentially jeopardizing consumers' health.
FDA Chief Speaks On Incident
FDA Commissioner Abhimanyu Kale in a statement to TOI said that "During inspection, our officers did not find any mention of cheese analogues anywhere. Items like 'cheese nuggets', 'cheesy dip', and 'cheese burger' were being labelled as such without indicating that the cheese was a substitute."
The FDA's scrutiny extends beyond McDonald's, with plans to probe other fast-food chains suspected of similar practices, as stated by Kale.
McDonald's issues clarification
Reacting to the development, McDonald's issued a statement on Friday. McDonald's India West & South spokesperson, in a statement, said, "Amid recent reports about the removal of 'Cheese' from our menu at McDonald's locations in Maharashtra, we want to assure our valued customers that only genuine, high-quality cheese is used in all our cheese-containing products. Collaborating with suppliers adhering to global standards ensures top-quality cheese in our product offerings and not cheese analogues or any substitute."
"We are actively engaging with the competent authorities on this issue and awaiting their final clarification. We have always been adhering to stringent food standards and are fully compliant with all applicable food laws. Our commitment to transparency in our ingredients and dedication to providing delicious, high-quality meals to our customers remain unwavering," the statement said.
Despite McDonald's contesting the FDA's actions, the outlet's license in Ahmednagar was suspended due to an unsatisfactory explanation.
In December, McDonald's purportedly communicated to the FDA that they had rebranded their products by omitting the term 'cheese.' However, the FDA insists on broader investigations into analogous practices by other fast-food chains.

ARTICLE 141
TITLE: Assam: Guwahati Police Seized Palm Oil-Laden Truck, 3 Thieves Arrested
URL: https://www.sentinelassam.com/cities/guwahati-city/assam-guwahati-police-seized-palm-oil-laden-truck-3-thieves-arrested

STAFF REPORTER
GUWAHATI: A West Guwahati Police District (WGPD) team from Azara PS arrested 3 thieves , named as Md Shahjamal Seikh (25), Md Shariful Islam (19), both from Dhubri and Md Sofiur Islam (35) of Bijni. The thieves stole a truckload of 1350 cartons of palm oil packets, valued at Rs. 11,75,000 from the Azara Rail yard. Originally destined for Dhubri, the seized truck (AS01 NC 2314) was diverted by the thugs with the goods towards Alipurduar. Further investigation is going on.
Also Read: Police arrest three thieves in Guwahati city (sentinelassam.com)
Also watch:

ARTICLE 142
TITLE: Vigilance raids continue on hoarders of edible oils
URL: https://www.thehansindia.com/andhra-pradesh/vigilance-raids-continue-on-hoarders-of-edible-oils-908026

Vijayawada : Vigilance and enforcement officials carried out raids on traders and wholesale shops across the state for unauthorised hoarding of stocks and seized edible oil, groundnut seeds and groundnut cake.
The officials have registered 70 cases under the Legal Metrology Act, 16 cases under Food Safety Act and one case under Essential Commodities Act against the traders and stockists. Director general of vigilance and enforcement Harish Kumar Gupta in a press release on Wednesday said that 43 teams conducted raids on 92 premises and seized 14,293 litre edible oils, 89,250 kg groundnut seeds and 298 bags of groundnut cake worth Rs1.75 crore and levied penalty of Rs 5.14 lakh for unauthorised storage.
Keeping in view the coming festival season, there is a possibility of unauthorised storage of edible oils and other commodities by the traders and creation of artificial scarcity in the market that will lead to rise in prices. The sudden hike of prices of edible oil and other commodities may cause burden to the consumers in the festival season.
Harish Kumar Gupta warned traders not to indulge in such activity which is causing hardships to the common people in the state and also stated that the surprise raids will continue further.

ARTICLE 143
TITLE: FSSAI initiative shows uptick in used cooking oil collection in Kerala 
URL: https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/kerala/2024/Sep/25/fssai-initiative-shows-uptick-in-used-cooking-oil-collection-in-kerala

THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: The RUCO (Repurpose Used Cooking Oil) initiative launched by the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) has been gaining traction in the state. In recent years, Kerala has witnessed an increase in the volume of used cooking oil collected through RUCO. In the year, 2022-2023, the state collected 4,19,561 litres of used oil. This figure more than doubled in 2023-2024, reaching 9,60,605 litres. In 2024 during the first five months, a total of 3,11,030 litres had already been collected, and officials said the figures would increase in the upcoming months.
The initiative aims to prevent used cooking oil from re-entering the food chain, instead channelling it towards biodiesel and soap manufacturing. This approach not only addresses public health concerns but also supports the production of renewable energy and sustainable products.
“The surge in collection numbers is a positive step forward. It addresses critical health issues in the food businesses,” said Ansha John, food safety officer at the commissionerate of food safety, Thiruvananthapuram.
Convenience and cost-saving measures often overshadow health concerns. People and big manufacturing units reuse cooking oil multiple times which could risk health.
Studies have highlighted the severe health implications of consuming food cooked in reused oil. Research published in the ‘Journal of Neurochemistry’ found that animals fed diets containing oxidised cooking oil exhibited memory impairment and increased brain inflammation compared to those consuming fresh oil.
Similarly, a study in the ‘Journal of Nutritional Biochemistry’ pointed out that trans fats from reused oil could disrupt the blood-brain barrier, allowing harmful substances to infiltrate the brain.
Additionally, the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) recently issued 17 new dietary guidelines to promote healthier food choices. The guidelines specifically warn against the repeated use of heated oils, which could increase the risk of cardiovascular diseases and cancer.
To counter the public health risks associated with reused cooking oil, RUCO’s approach involves a network of aggregators who collect used oil from food business operators and manufacturers.
The collected oil is then repurposed into biodiesel and other eco-friendly products, preventing it from re-entering the food chain. Currently, RUCO operates through 57 enrolled non-food products using cooking oil (NFP)units and 73 aggregators across 16 states and Union Territories, including Kerala.
The programme’s impact goes beyond health, contributing to energy security, climate change mitigation, and sustainable development. The government has also joined the initiative to spread the word. As more food business operators participate in the initiative, a continued growth in oil collection figures can be obtained.

ARTICLE 144
TITLE: FSSAI seizes 1,780 litres of reheated cooking oil, 306 kg of sweets for excessive use of colourants in Coimbatore
URL: https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Coimbatore/fssai-seizes-1780-litres-of-reheated-cooking-oil-306-kg-of-sweets-for-excessive-use-of-colourants-in-coimbatore/article68810578.ece

The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) seized a total 1,780 litres of cooking oil, which was used multiple times for the making of sweets and savouries, during surprise inspections held across Coimbatore district ahead of Deepavali.
The food regulator also seized 306 kg of sweets worth ₹98,700 that were suspected to have been made with artificial colouring agents beyond the permissible levels.
According to the district administration, food safety officers led by FSSAI designated officer K. Tamilselvan carried out surprise inspections in the manufacturing units and shops of wholesale and retail dealers between October 18 and 28.
The inspections covered 436 manufacturing units and shops in Mettupalayam, Pollachi, Sulur, Kinathukadavu, Madukkarai, Thondamuthur, Annur, S.S. Kulam, Periyanaickenpalayam, Karamadai, Anamalai and Valparai in the rural and places in the Coimbatore Corporation limits, including Peelamedu, Ganapathy, Podanur, Town Hall, R.S. Puram, Saravanampatti, Saibaba Colony, Singanallur, Kalapatty, Avinashi Road, Gandhipuram, Vadavalli, Race Course and Ramanathapuram.
Food safety officers collected 57 samples of sweets, which were suspected to have been made using excessive concentration of colourants. Notice under Section 55 (penalty for failure to comply with the directions of the Food Safety Officer) of the Food Safety And Standards Act, 2006, was served on 32 manufacturers.
Five shops, which were found using banned plastic products for packaging, were imposed with a fine of ₹2,000 each. The 1,780 litres of oil seized during the inspections was handed over to agencies involved in the Repurpose Used Cooking Oil (RUCO) project.
Published - October 29, 2024 06:10 pm IST

ARTICLE 145
TITLE: Amid Widespread Adulteration in Mustard Oil, Anjali Gold Passes Government Lab Test with Highest Purity Score
URL: https://www.thehansindia.com/news/business/amid-widespread-adulteration-in-mustard-oilanjali-gold-passes-government-lab-test-with-highest-purity-score-966687

At a time when growing concerns surround the quality of  edible oils in India, a random government lab test has validated the purity of Anjali  Gold Mustard Oil, offering rare reassurance to Indian consumers.
    The test was conducted independently by Dr. Shashikant  Pardeshi, Government Food Analyst at the District Public Health Laboratory  (DPHL), Jalgaon, as part of routine analysis. Using the Bellier Turbidity  Temperature Test (BTTT) — a method recognized by the Food Safety and Standards  Authority of India (FSSAI) — the oil recorded a BTTT value of 27.5°C, the  maximum purity score permitted under Indian food safety law, confirming zero  adulteration.
    The result has been published in the International Journal  of Scientific Development and Research (IJSDR), and is publicly accessible.
         India’s mustard oil market has long been plagued by blending  and adulteration, with many manufacturers diluting mustard oil with cheaper  alternatives like palm or rice bran oil. These practices not only mislead  consumers but also pose long-term health risks.
        The BTTT test remains a vital indicator in detecting such  impurities — and failing this test has led to multiple prosecutions across the  country under food safety laws.
        A Word from the Founder
        Atul Saxena, Chairman and Founder of Anjali Gold Mustard  Oil, responded to the report by reinforcing the company’s long-held stance:
        “We’ve never had to pay anyone to test our oil. This was a  routine lab check — and the results speak for themselves. I’ve always strongly  opposed adulteration in the food industry. It may help a few make quick  profits, but it puts millions of families at health risk. At Anjali Gold, we  believe purity is not a luxury — it’s a basic right for every consumer.”
        Transparency, Not Just Talk
        In an industry where purity claims often go unverified,  Anjali Gold Mustard Oil stands out for being independently validated. The full  report is available on public record.
        With trust in food products under pressure, this recognition  adds credibility to Anjali Gold’s ongoing commitment to provide 100% pure  Kacchi Ghani mustard oil, free from compromise.

ARTICLE 146
TITLE: Karnataka Food Safety and Drug Administration shifts focus to trans fat reduction in cooking oil
URL: https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/bangalore/karnataka-food-safety-and-drug-administration-shifts-focus-to-trans-fat-reduction-in-cooking-oil/article69879479.ece

After a crackdown on food additives, the State Food Safety and Drug Administration has now turned its attention towards tackling trans fat in cooking oil, with a focus on improving public health and food safety.
In a video conference, chaired by the Commissioner of Food Safety and Drug Administration on Wednesday, key stakeholders, including district officials, hotel and bakery association representatives, RUCO (Repurpose Used Cooking Oil) agency heads, and members of the Karnataka State Bio-Diesel Development Board, gathered to discuss a multi-pronged strategy.
Hygiene and labelling
The commissioner directed all cooking oil manufacturers to ensure strict hygiene in production, proper labelling per FSSAI norms, and mandatory fortification of cooking oil with Vitamin A and D. Manufacturers were also advised to conduct oil quality analysis every six months to ensure compliance.
U.S. Vishal Rao, oncologist and head and neck surgeon at HCG Cancer Centre, joined the meeting virtually and stressed the importance of using cooking oils with reduced trans fat.
He highlighted the link between trans fat and non-communicable diseases such as heart disease and cancer, urging the food industry to adopt healthier practices.
RUCO agency representatives informed the commissioner that 32.68 lakh litres of used cooking oil had been collected during 2024-25 and 2025-26.
Agencies were encouraged to ramp up collection efforts and supply the used oil to authorised bio-diesel units.
Preventing reuse
Strict instructions were issued to hotel and bakery operators to hand over used oil to registered RUCO agencies to prevent its reuse — a practice that poses serious health risks.
The food safety commissioner reiterated the administration’s commitment to building a safer and healthier food ecosystem in Karnataka, with the reduction of trans fat and proper oil disposal emerging as key priorities.
Published - July 31, 2025 11:18 pm IST

ARTICLE 147
TITLE: 365 litres of palm oil stocked in unhygienic, used cans seized from snacks-making unit in Aruppukottai
URL: https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Madurai/365-litres-of-palm-oil-stocked-in-unhygienic-used-cans-seized-from-snacks-making-unit-in-aruppukottai/article69901967.ece

A team of officers from the Department of Food Safety seized 365 litres of palm oil that were stocked in used cans without seal and label from a snacks manufacturing unit at Aruppukottai on Wednesday.
The team led by Virudhunagar district Food Safety Designated Officer Dr. S. Mariappan, found the palm oil, used for making snacks, that was packed in unhygienic cans.
“As per Food Safety Act, the cans should have been sealed and should also bear the label of the manufacturer or supplier,” he said.
Besides, the officials found 11 kg of non-iodised salt on the premises and seized it. The operation of the unit has been suspended till the unit got FSSAI license.
Based on the information given by the trader, the officials then inspected an oil shop in Aruppukottai market, and found 195 litres of palm oil that were kept in old and unhygienic cans.
The officials have lifted samples of palm oil for analysis.
Then the officials inspected a palm oil supplier at Fatima Nagar in Virudhunagar and found he had supplied palm oil in unsealed and unlabelled cans which were found at the snacks manufacturing unit and at the trader in Aruppukottai.
The team also seized 327 used plastic cans and 3,099 used tins from the premises. Further action is underway.
Dr. Mariappan said that all the traders of edible oil should have FSSAI license, manufacturers should sell the edible oil only in packed and labelled cans and used cans should not be used for refilling.
Published - August 06, 2025 07:41 pm IST

ARTICLE 148
TITLE: FSSAI’s drive to convert used cooking oil as biofuel gets good response in several districts in T.N.  
URL: https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/tamil-nadu/fssais-drive-to-convert-used-cooking-oil-as-biofuel-gets-good-response-in-several-districts-in-tn/article70152299.ece

The Repurpose Used Cooking Oil (RUCO) initiative launched by the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) to collect used oil from food manufacturers and convert it into biofuel has gained traction in recent years, especially in the run-up to festivals.
Tiruvanaikovil-based kB Energy Corporation, an FSSAI-licensed start-up that buys used oil from over 2,000 restaurants, catering units, sweet manufacturers, canteens in educational institutions and hospitals in the districts of Tiruchi, Dindigul, Pudukottai, Thanjavur, Tiruvarur, Nagapattinam and Mayiladuthurai, has a stock of close to 30 tonnes of used oil ahead of Deepavali this year. During normal period, 15 to 20 tonnes of used oil is collected per month.
“Sellers of deep-fried snacks use up to 50 litres of oil per day. Bigger companies use up to 100 litres. As per FSSAI norms, at least 20 to 25% of the oil that is used can be given away for biofuel production,” Kishore Kumar Baskaran, the start-up’s founder-proprietor, told The Hindu on Saturday.
There are three biofuel manufacturing plants in Tamil Nadu and approximately 64 across India, said Mr. Kishore. “After a slow start initially, used oil collection has become competitive, with many jobs being generated in allied fields for young entrepreneurs. There is a growing awareness about the toxicity in used cooking oil that could cause serious health problems,” he said.
Once collected, the used oil is filtered, and stored in large barrels and tanks on the Tiruvanaikovil premises.
“Since we are authorised aggregators, licensed by FSSAI and Biodiesel Association of India, we can supply the used oil only to biofuel manufacturers. Those who are not licensed, tend to resell used cooking oils to be reused by smaller restaurants, up to four to five times. Customers have started realising the dangers of reusing cooking oil and now prefer to sell their used stock to us,” said Mr. Kishore.
Food safety
The district administration has advised consumers to ensure that they purchase their traditional sweets, savouries and baked goods being prepared for Deepavali this year, from vendors who comply with FSSAI standards and have a valid Hygiene Rating Certificate.
According to an official advisory on Saturday, those found to be operating without a certificate would be prosecuted. Members of the public can lodge their food-related complaints on the WhatsApp number 9444042322 or email unavupukar@gmail.com.
Complaints can be registered on the TN Food Safety Consumer App or Food Safety Connect. Consumer grievances can be recorded on https://foscos.fssai.gov.in
Published - October 11, 2025 07:43 pm IST

ARTICLE 149
TITLE: NHRC Seeks FSSAI Report on Reused Cooking Oil Health Risks
URL: https://www.newkerala.com/news/o/nhrc-seeks-report-fssai-alleged-reuse-cooking-oil-956

NHRC seeks report from FSSAI over alleged reuse of cooking oil
New Delhi, Oct 24
The National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) has issued a notice to the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) over allegations of large-scale reuse of cooking oil by small hotels, roadside eateries and food vendors across the country, posing serious threats to public health and the environment.
A Bench presided by NHRC Member Priyank Kanoongo took cognisance of a complaint filed by the Founder of Sarthak Samudayik Vikas Evam Jan Kalyan Sanstha raising concerns that despite the FSSAI's "RUCO - Repurpose Used Cooking Oil" initiative, repeated use and resale of used cooking oil continues unchecked at the ground level.
According to the complaint, the practice exposes citizens to severe health risks including cancer, heart diseases, and liver disorders. It further alleged that the improper disposal of discarded oil contaminates water and soil, thereby contributing to environmental pollution.
The complainant requested the apex human rights body's intervention, urging strict enforcement of existing food safety regulations and stronger coordination among FSSAI, Pollution Control Boards, and municipal authorities.
It also sought the establishment of authorised oil purification and reuse centres, and the launch of nationwide awareness campaigns to educate citizens about the dangers of reused cooking oil.
Observing that the allegations, if true, prima facie indicate violations of human rights related to public health, the NHRC directed the FSSAI to inquire into the matter and submit a detailed state-wise report.
While issuing the notice under Section 12 of the Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993, the apex human rights body has sought an Action Taken Report (ATR) from the FSSAI within two weeks for its perusal.
Established under the Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993, the NHRC, an autonomous statutory body, is an embodiment of India's concern for the promotion and protection of human rights.
Its primary role is to protect and promote human rights, defined as the rights relating to life, liberty, equality, and dignity of individuals guaranteed by the Constitution or embodied in international covenants and enforceable by courts in India.
— IANS

ARTICLE 150
TITLE: NHRC Acts On Complaint, Seeks Report From FSSAI On Rampant Reuse of Cooking Oil
URL: https://swarajyamag.com/news-brief/nhrc-acts-on-complaint-seeks-report-from-fssai-on-rampant-reuse-of-cooking-oil

In a move highlighting growing food safety concerns, the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) has sent a notice to the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) over rampant violations of norms governing the reuse of cooking oil across the country, India Today reported.
The NHRC observed that despite repeated awareness campaigns, small eateries and street vendors still reuse cooking oil multiple times — a practice it described as a grave public health risk and a violation of citizens’ basic human rights.
In a notice dated 22 October, the NHRC directed FSSAI to submit state-wise data and an action-taken report from the FSSAI within two weeks.
This action came after a complaint from Bhopal-based NGO Sarthak Samudayik Vikas Evam Jan Kalyan Sanstha, which alleged that the FSSAI’s Repurpose Used Cooking Oil (RUCO) campaign had failed to stop the unsafe reuse of degraded oil, especially in smaller and unregulated food outlets.
"We found the allegation to be correct prima facie and understand it to be a nationwide problem that needs to be tackled immediately by the FSSAI and state food regulators in the interest of public health," NHRC member Priyank Kanoongo, whose bench issued the notice, was quoted as saying by India Today.
As per the Food Safety and Standards (Licensing and Registration of Food Businesses) Regulations, 2011—amended in 2018—cooking oil is deemed unsafe when its Total Polar Compounds (TPC) exceed 25 per cent.
TPCs are harmful compounds formed when oil breaks down through repeated heating—common in frying.
The longer the exposure to heat and moisture, the higher the toxicity level.
Medical research links consumption of oil with high TPC content to severe health disorders such as hypertension, atherosclerosis, liver ailments, Alzheimer’s, and even cancer.
Reheating oil also increases trans fats, worsening the danger.
With an annual consumption of nearly 2,500 crore litres, India ranks among the world’s top vegetable oil consumers. About 60 per cent of this is used in homes, and the rest in restaurants, hotels, and street food stalls.
Given such massive consumption, regulating the use and disposal of cooking oil is vital for both public health and environmental safety.
FSSAI mandates that eateries consuming over 50 litres of oil daily must test and record its quality.
Once TPC levels cross 25 per cent, the oil must be handed over to authorised collectors to prevent it from re-entering the food chain.
FSSAI rules further state that used oil must be stored in labelled containers to prevent contamination and must not be disposed of through drains or sewers.
Smaller food stalls are advised to reuse oil no more than three times—ideally just once.
Oil showing signs of darkening, foaming, or bluish smoke must be discarded immediately.
For homes, the FSSAI recommends reusing fried oil only for cooking curries after filtering and never for frying again.
Despite these clear standards, the complainant informed NHRC that the illegal reuse and resale of cooking oil are widespread.
Many eateries reportedly sell or dispose of used oil improperly, allowing it to re-enter the food chain or contaminate soil and water sources, creating both health and environmental hazards.
To support the National Policy on Biofuels, the FSSAI launched the Repurpose Used Cooking Oil (RUCO) initiative in 2018.
RUCO’s objective was to build a structured system to collect used cooking oil and convert it into biodiesel—a cleaner, renewable alternative to traditional fuels.
The policy set a goal of 5 per cent biodiesel blending into diesel by 2030, aiming to cut pollution while boosting energy self-reliance.
Under RUCO, FSSAI introduced an Education, Enforcement, and Ecosystem (EEE) framework to raise awareness among food operators, enforce compliance, and penalize violations.
The scheme also aimed to connect restaurants and food chains with biodiesel manufacturers and aggregators through organised oil collection networks.
However, the NGO’s complaint claimed that RUCO’s implementation remains weak on the ground—especially across small towns and unregulated street-food sectors.
Please click here to add Swarajya as your preferred and trusted news source on Google
We light sparks. What you just read is one of them.
Every story at Swarajya begins the same way: someone notices something that isn't quite right, or something that's working quietly in the background that nobody's talking about. We go find that story, speak to the people who know it from the inside, and write it up in a way that makes it impossible to ignore.
We do this because we believe a country cannot fix what it cannot see clearly. And India is at a moment where seeing clearly matters more than it ever has.
This is what your subscription funds. Not just access to articles — the work itself. The phone calls, the research, the writers who care enough to get it right. If what you just read made you think, even a little, that's a spark. And sparks, when enough of them gather, ignite something much larger.
Join us. Lets keep the sparks coming.

ARTICLE 151
TITLE: NHRC Seeks FSSAI Report on Reused Cooking Oil Health Risks
URL: https://www.newkerala.com/news/o/nhrc-seeks-report-fssai-widespread-reuse-cooking-oil-india-847

NHRC seeks report from FSSAI over widespread reuse of cooking oil in India
New Delhi, October 25
The National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) has taken cognisance of a complaint highlighting the alarming and widespread practice of reusing cooking oil across India, terming it a potential violation of human rights due to its serious public health and environmental implications.
The complaint, filed by the Founder of Sarthak Samudayik Vikas Evam Jan Kalyan Sanstha (Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh), raised concerns that despite the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India's (FSSAI) "RUCO - Repurpose Used Cooking Oil" campaign and policies promoting biodiesel at small hotels, roadside eateries, and food vendors continue to repeatedly reuse or resell used cooking oil.
According to the complaint, this practice poses "severe public health risks, including cancer, heart diseases and liver disorders." It further cautioned that improperly discarded oil contaminates water and soil, leading to environmental pollution and long-term ecological harm.
"The complainant sought urgent intervention of the Commission in the matter and required to consider it as a human rights issue affecting public health, and to direct enforcement agencies (FSSAI, Pollution Control Boards, municipal authorities) to strictly implement regulations, establish authorised oil purification and reuse centres, and launch awareness campaigns to sensitise citizens about the dangers of reused cooking oil."
After reviewing the complaint, the NHRC Bench headed by Member Priyank Kanoongo issued a notice under Section 12 of the Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993, to the Chairman of the FSSAI, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India.
The Commission directed the FSSAI to conduct an inquiry into the allegations and submit a detailed state-wise Action Taken Report (ATR) within two weeks.
— ANI

ARTICLE 152
TITLE: 'Detergent, Urea, Refined Oil': Alleged Milk Adulteration Racket Busted In Mumbai's Andheri; Viral Video Reveals Shocking Details
URL: https://www.freepressjournal.in/mumbai/detergent-urea-refined-oil-alleged-milk-adulteration-racket-busted-in-mumbais-andheri-viral-video-reveals-shocking-details

Mumbai: Mumbai has witnessed fresh allegations of milk adulteration, with residents of Andheri West’s Kapaswadi area claiming that adulterated milk is being supplied openly in the locality. The alleged racket has raised serious concerns over public health, particularly affecting children, women and senior citizens.
Viral Video Shows Milk Adulteration Racket Busted
A viral video shows the alleged racket reportedly being busted by local residents and a cop. In the video, one can see a room filled with milk packets. The man recording the video can be seen carrying a hardened plastic baton, often carried by cops. The man can be seen entering a house where a man and a woman can be seen in the video.
He can be heard asking the man in the video to 'make something'. "Chal baith k maal bana," he can be heard saying as the person in the video can be seen asking him what his fault is. As the video concludes, the man can be seen lighting a fire lamp, probably showing the technique of how he does the milk adulteration. The video has gone viral with several netizens claiming that the alleged racket has been into existence since decades.
According to local residents, synthetic milk is reportedly being prepared using chemical substances and supplied to households under the guise of genuine dairy products. According to reports, substances such as detergent powder, urea, soap solution, refined oil and other synthetic chemicals are being mixed to create milk-like liquid. Residents further claimed that one litre of original milk is allegedly diluted with water and chemicals to produce nearly double the quantity, which is then supplied daily to consumers.
Supply Chain Under Scrutiny
Locals alleged that milk packets do not reach consumers directly from authorised dairy centres. Instead, the original packets are reportedly diverted to private locations where adulteration takes place. The adulterated milk is then repackaged into fresh pouches and distributed in nearby areas.
Health Risks Highlighted
Medical experts warn that long-term consumption of adulterated milk can lead to serious health complications. These include kidney and liver damage, impaired growth in children, calcium deficiency in women, and chronic gastrointestinal, skin and eye-related disorders.
Authorities Yet to Act
The alleged racket has raised questions about monitoring by the Food Safety and Standards Authority, the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC) and other enforcement agencies. Netizens have demanded immediate inspections, sample testing and strict action against those found guilty by the Mumbai Police.
As of now, there has been no official confirmation or response from civic or food safety authorities regarding the allegations. Locals have urged the administration to intervene urgently, stating that unchecked adulteration could pose a major public health risk. Further developments are awaited as authorities are expected to verify the claims through inspections and laboratory testing.
To get details on exclusive and budget-friendly property deals in Mumbai & surrounding regions, do visit: https://budgetproperties.in/

ARTICLE 153
TITLE: Illegal samosa making unit busted in Hyderabad’s Jiyaguda; stale eggs, used cooking oil seized
URL: https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Hyderabad/illegal-samosa-making-unit-busted-in-hyderabads-jiyaguda-stale-eggs-used-cooking-oil-seized/article70768563.ece

A 73-year-old man was held after the Hyderabad police Task Force uncovered an illegal samosa manufacturing unit operating under highly unhygienic conditions in Jiyaguda, seizing food stock and equipment worth an estimated ₹5 lakh.
Acting on specific inputs, the Hyderabad Food Adulteration Surveillance Team (H-FAST), along with Task Force personnel and the Kulsumpura police, carried out a raid at a premises opposite SBA Garden on Friday (March 20, 2026) evening. The accused, identified as Abdul Rasheed, was running the unit without mandatory clearances, including an FSSAI licence, trade licence, or fire safety certification.
Published - March 21, 2026 12:53 pm IST

ARTICLE 154
TITLE: 1,000 kg onions destroyed, 480 kg cooking oil seized in Kukatpally
URL: https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Hyderabad/1000-kg-onions-destroyed-480-kg-cooking-oil-seized-in-kukatpally/article70894399.ece

Telangana Food Safety authorities destroyed 1,000 kg of raw onions and seized 480 kg of cooking oil during a raid on a food unit in Kukatpally on Wednesday.
The department, acting on inputs from the SOT Police, inspected M/s Naseeb Birhsta at Kaithalapur, and uncovered serious violations. Officials found that used cooking oil was being procured and reused for the bulk preparation of fried onions, raising concerns over public health risks, said a release.
The premises were also found to be in a highly unhygienic condition, prompting immediate action by the enforcement team. In addition to the destruction of raw stock, around 70 kg of fried onions were also disposed of.
Authorities seized approximately 480 kg of cooking oil after collecting samples for laboratory analysis. Following the raid, the premises were sealed and further investigation has been initiated.
Published - April 23, 2026 12:25 am IST

ARTICLE 155
TITLE: Food safety inspection flags unsafe cooking oil at KFC outlet in Kondapur
URL: https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Hyderabad/food-safety-inspection-flags-unsafe-cooking-oil-at-kfc-outlet-in-kondapur/article70940073.ece

A random food safety inspection conducted at a KFC outlet in Rajarajeshwari Colony, Kondapur, has found violations related to the quality of cooking oil, prompting authorities to initiate action under relevant rules.
According to the Zonal Commissioner of Serilingampally, Cyberabad Municipal Corporation, the inspection was carried out along with the Food Safety Officer (FSO) team on Monday. During the inspection, Total Polar Compounds (TPC) levels in the cooking oil were found to be above the permissible limits. The oil was also observed to have dark discolouration, indicating deterioration and potential health risks.
Elevated TPC levels are a key indicator of degraded oil, which can be unsafe for consumption if used beyond prescribed limits. Following the findings, the authorities have begun proceedings against the establishment as per food safety regulations.
Published - May 04, 2026 11:52 pm IST

ARTICLE 156
TITLE: Madhya Pradesh: Oil factory owner in Indore arrested for packing palm oil in branded soyabean oil packets
URL: https://www.freepressjournal.in/indore/madhya-pradesh-oil-factory-owner-in-indore-arrested-for-packing-palm-oil-in-branded-soyabean-oil-packets

Indore: An oil factory owner was arrested for packing palm oil in the packets of different brands of soyabean and other vegetable oils in Palda area late on Friday. The joint team of food department and administration raided the factory and the sample of the oil was taken from there.
Bhanwarkuan police station incharge Santosh Kumar Dudhi said the raid was conducted at the factory named Bhole Food Product on Palda Road. The food department found that the factory owner Yogesh Kukreja, 40, a resident of Kesarbag Road was packing the imported palm oil in brand packets of soyabean and vegetable oils. He was also using a hallmark on the packets to gain consumers’ trust.
The officials found that the quality of palm oil was also not good. The team detained Kukreja and handed him over to police. The police have registered a case under Sections 420, 272, 273 of the IPC against the accused on the complaint of food inspector Himani Singh.

ARTICLE 157
TITLE: Bangladesh can export edible oil to India: Indian envoy
URL: https://www.sentinelassam.com/international/bangladesh-can-export-edible-oil-to-india-indian-envoy-525983

DHAKA: The Indian High Commissioner to Bangladesh, Vikram Kumar Doraiswami, said on Tuesday that Bangladesh can export edible oil to India at 20 per cent value addition to the product, as he urged the business communities of both the countries to convince the governments to upgrade goods transportation facilities.
On Indian investment in Bangladesh, Doraiswami said, "It would be great if we could jointly work to stimulate more Indian businesses to come to Bangladesh and invest in the Special Economic Zones (SEZs), as Bangladesh has huge potentials. The Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC) and the Bangladesh, China, India and Myanmar (BCIM) economic corridor need to be tapped for mutual interests of the private sector, Doraiswami added.
The High Commissioner on Tuesday paid a courtesy visit to the Dhaka Chamber of Commerce & Industry (DCCI) and held bilateral trade talks with the President of DCCI, Rizwan Rahman.
During the discussion, Rahman said that the bilateral trade between Bangladesh and India stood at $6.9 billion in FY 2019-20, when Bangladesh's exports to India were $1.10 billion against imports of $5.79 billion.
The total FDI stock from India to Bangladesh as of September 2020 was $645.54 million. Since 2017, Bangladeshi jute products have been facing anti-dumping duties ranging between $19 and $351.72 per tonne while exporting to India, he added.
Besides, India has enacted the Customs Rules 2020 which may create problems in claiming preferential duty for Bangladeshi goods in the Indian market under SAFTA and APTA.
The cost of transporting goods from Dhaka to Delhi is significantly higher than those from Dhaka to other European and US ports, he mentioned. Rahman requested India to expedite the implementation of the Indian Line of Credit promised to Bangladesh. He also urged to review the Custom Rules 2020 pertaining to rules of origin and mutual recognition of quality certification given by both the countries.
The DCCI chief said the private sector needs to be included in the joint economic commission to address the non-tariff barriers and trade related disputes.
The Indian High Commissioner said, "We're also very keen to expedite the use of Bangladesh's existing river ports for goods transportation, but this needs a few regulatory things to be done, including river dredging. We would like to establish a unique mechanism to allow Bangladesh's BSTI certification, especially for food products as well as other goods, including steel, in a reciprocal manner."
He also urged for infrastructure development and technological advancement of all the land ports in Bangladesh to expedite faster export and import processes. The cost of transportation and time between Delhi and Chattogram port is unendurably high, the High Commissioner mentioned.
There are five railway crossings that are connected between the two sides now. Doraiswami said for goods export and import, railway can be the most cost-effective option, as he renewed his call for railway infrastructure and capacity development.
Doraiswami also emphasised on the upgradation of land port infrastructures of the two countries, transit and connectivity, cross-border railway connectivity and implementation of the BBIN Motor Vehicle Agreement. (IANS)

ARTICLE 158
TITLE: ‘All it takes is a slick of edible oil to arrest water evaporation’ 
URL: https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/economy/agri-business/all-it-takes-is-a-slick-of-edible-oil-to-arrest-water-evaporation/article34141034.ece

Farmers dig small ponds, particularly in rainfed areas, to collect water from the rainy season and save it for the rabi season. Though it is quite common for farmers to use tarpaulin sheets in the pond beds to stop seepage, they still lose up to 2-4 inches per week of precious water due to evaporation, particularly during the March-June period when temperatures raise sharply.
One progressive farmer in Vikarabad district has developed a hack that can reduce water evaporation by up to 70 per cent. The technique involves pouring a few litres of edible oil on the water, which forms a sheet cover on the water as it is less dense.
The sheet of oil protects water from direct heat and also stops water molecules from escaping from the surface.
According to an estimation, farmers lose up to one-fourth inch to half-an-inch in water level a day in a farm pond during the summer.
“For a normal sized pool, you will lose 25,000 to 50,000 gallons of water a year,” MS Subrahmanyam Raju, a progressive farmer from Jingurthi village in Thandur mandal of Vikarabad district, told BusinessLine .
“This is not something new. In vogue in the past, the technique went into oblivion over a period of time,” he said.
He, however, cautioned that this technique should be used in farm ponds and not other ponds that are used to draw drinking water.
Also, there is no need to use fresh edible oil, which is currently priced at around ₹150 a litre. “They can use the oil that was used once and sold by hotels at about ₹50 a litre. The cost-benefit factor is in favour of the farmer,” Raju, General Secretary of Go Aadharitha Prakriti Vyavasayadarula Sangham (an association of farmers that practise farming using cow products), said.
He has experimented with this technique at two ponds and claims that the results are quite promising.
“You will require 25 litres of oil for a 1,000-sq m pond. You need to top it up with another 13 litres after a month,” he said.
Published on March 23, 2021

ARTICLE 159
TITLE: Sri Lanka bans palm oil imports with immediate effect; asks plantations to uproot trees
URL: https://www.newindianexpress.com/world/2021/apr/06/sri-lanka-bans-palm-oil-imports-with-immediate-effect-asks-plantations-to-uproot-trees-2286572.html

COLOMBO: Sri Lankan President Gotabaya Rajapaksa has banned the import of palm oil with immediate effect and ordered local plantation companies to uproot 10 per cent of their trees and replace them with rubber trees or other environment-friendly crops, a move that could benefit the domestic coconut oil industry.
The cultivation of palm (katupol) oil, at the same time, will be completely banned, the Presidential Secretariat said in a statement on Monday.
The Director-General of Customs has also been informed of this decision and advised to refrain from clearing palm oil cargos at the Department of Customs, it said.
The Controller General of the Department of Imports and Exports Control has been advised to issue the relevant gazette order to give effect to the order.
About six months ago, the President had instructed to gradually ban the cultivation of palm oil in the country, the Presidential Secretariat said.
Companies and entities, which have done such cultivations, will be required to remove them on a phased-out manner with 10 per cent uprooting at a time and replacing it with the cultivation of rubber or environment-friendly crops each year to free Sri Lanka from oil palm plantation and palm oil consumption, it said.
When this is fully operational, the government intends to stop the cultivation of oil palm and the consumption of palm oil completely, the order added.
Sri Lanka imports nearly 200,000 tonnes of palm oil from Malaysia and Indonesia yearly, according to media reports.
In a reaction, the Consumer Protection Society welcomed the move.
Ranjith Withanage of the Society said the decision would boost the local coconut oil industry.
More people would be inclined to enter the coconut oil industry as a result, he said.
According to the Sri Lanka Export Development Board, the country is the fourth-largest exporter of coconut products to the world.
Coconut accounts for approximately 12 per cent of all agricultural produce in Sri Lanka with the total land area under cultivation covering 409,244 hectares (in 2017) and about 2,500-3000 million nuts produced per year (by 2017).
New measures have been introduced to enhance the annual coconut crop to 3,600 million nuts per year.
Reacting to Sri Lanka's decision to ban the import of palm oil, Malaysia said the move is not expected to affect the country's key commodity industry as the country's market is growing in several countries such as Africa and the Middle East.
Minister of Plantation Industries and Commodities Dr Mohd Khairuddin Aman Razali said apart from that, the demand for Malaysia's palm oil was also increasing in the Philippines and Vietnam, thus proving that the quality of the commodity was one of the factors that helped expand its market globally.
"The world has a population of over seven billion people and we are confident our palm oil will be accepted worldwide.
"If one party is not interested, many more are interested and most importantly we give the best quality in the country's palm oil production," he was quoted as saying by Malaysia's The Star newspaper reported on Tuesday.
Mohd Khairuddin said the restrictions imposed by Sri Lanka was a discrimination against the country's product.
"Sri Lanka needs to get complete information from the Malaysian government on the efforts made so that our right to market palm oil abroad is not disputed," he said.

ARTICLE 160
TITLE: Assam: Amid Rising Cooking Oil Price Thief Arrested in Hojai for Stealing Mustard Oil
URL: https://www.sentinelassam.com/north-east-india-news/assam-news/assam-amid-rising-cooking-oil-price-thief-arrested-in-hojai-for-stealing-mustard-oil-561391

GUWAHATI: The Hojai police arrested a man for, allegedly, stealing mustard oil from a shop. The accused has been identified as one Debashis Dey from Samarbasti, Hojai.
According to the investigating police, Debashish and two of his accomplices stole some packets of mustard oil from a shop located in the Lalmati area, Hojai.
The police recovered 16-liter Engine brand mustard oil from him. Meanwhile, his two accomplices are on the run. The arrested accused was also involved in an LPG cylinders theft from a local Kali Mandir.
According to the police, Debashish stole two cylinders from the mandir. The police also recovered one cylinder from him.
Notably, in recent days, the country has been a massive spike in the price of edible oil as well as other commodities including fuel oil and LPG price.
On the other hand, the prices of almost all medicines have been rising during the last two to three months. As of date, a strip of 'Shelcal-500' is selling at the rate of Rs 108.70. Just two to three months back, this strip was sold at Rs 98.90.
"A common man cannot afford fuel and mustard oil at the same time. Fuel prices hit a century while mustard oil has crossed double century," says Pradip Deka, a businessman who can no longer afford to regularly use his motorcycle, and instead now used a bicycle as his regular mode of transportation.
Also Watch:

ARTICLE 161
TITLE: Sebi Bans Launch Of New Derivative Contracts Of Crude Palm Oil
URL: https://www.businessworld.in/article/Sebi-Bans-Launch-Of-New-Derivative-Contracts-Of-Crude-Palm-Oil/21-12-2021-415389

Former Uttar Pradesh Chief Secretary and author Alok Ranjan argues that India’s development journey must move beyond economic output to focus on happiness, quality of life, education, healthcare and inclusive growth
India's big securities fraud charge was built by comparing a gold refinery's gross sales turnover to its processing margin alone — and SEBI's own order contains the table that makes the question unavoidable. Then comes the ex-parte action after 20 months of open investigation, a forensic audit conducted on 2% of the evidence, and directions so mild they barely register the severity of the charge.
SEBI's own document defeats SEBI. The regulator has advanced India's largest securities allegation while its own order cannot specify what, exactly, it is charging.
Meta will acquire about a 20 per cent minority stake in CRED and Shah will step down from his operating role as chief executive officer of CRED and join Meta’s global leadership team
The index of eight core industries (ICI) increased by 0.5 per cent in May 2026, as compared to a final growth rate of 1.8 per cent in April 2026
The Union Budget 2026–27 allocated Rs 1,000 crore toward India Semiconductor Mission (ISM) 2.0, while the government has already approved 10 ISM projects worth Rs 1.60 lakh crore across six states. India’s semiconductor market is also projected to reach $100–110 billion by 2030, underlining the scale of the opportunity ahead
Former Uttar Pradesh Chief Secretary and author Alok Ranjan argues that India’s development journey must move beyond economic output to focus on happiness, quality of life, education, healthcare and inclusive growth
India's big securities fraud charge was built by comparing a gold refinery's gross sales turnover to its processing margin alone — and SEBI's own order contains the table that makes the question unavoidable. Then comes the ex-parte action after 20 months of open investigation, a forensic audit conducted on 2% of the evidence, and directions so mild they barely register the severity of the charge.
SEBI's own document defeats SEBI. The regulator has advanced India's largest securities allegation while its own order cannot specify what, exactly, it is charging.
Meta will acquire about a 20 per cent minority stake in CRED and Shah will step down from his operating role as chief executive officer of CRED and join Meta’s global leadership team
The index of eight core industries (ICI) increased by 0.5 per cent in May 2026, as compared to a final growth rate of 1.8 per cent in April 2026
The Union Budget 2026–27 allocated Rs 1,000 crore toward India Semiconductor Mission (ISM) 2.0, while the government has already approved 10 ISM projects worth Rs 1.60 lakh crore across six states. India’s semiconductor market is also projected to reach $100–110 billion by 2030, underlining the scale of the opportunity ahead
Former Uttar Pradesh Chief Secretary and author Alok Ranjan argues that India’s development journey must move beyond economic output to focus on happiness, quality of life, education, healthcare and inclusive growth
India's big securities fraud charge was built by comparing a gold refinery's gross sales turnover to its processing margin alone — and SEBI's own order contains the table that makes the question unavoidable. Then comes the ex-parte action after 20 months of open investigation, a forensic audit conducted on 2% of the evidence, and directions so mild they barely register the severity of the charge.
SEBI's own document defeats SEBI. The regulator has advanced India's largest securities allegation while its own order cannot specify what, exactly, it is charging.
Former Uttar Pradesh Chief Secretary and author Alok Ranjan argues that India’s development journey must move beyond economic output to focus on happiness, quality of life, education, healthcare and inclusive growth
Raj Thackeray Entered The Kohinoor Deal When The Money Came In. He Left Before It Burned And Losses Came In. ED questioned him for 8.5 hours. Maharashtra Is Still Waiting For An Explanation. Raj Thackeray's Kohinoor story remains one of Maharashtra’s least examined financial mysteries.
Subscribe to our newsletter to get updates on our latest news
Subscribe to our newsletter to get updates on our latest news

ARTICLE 162
TITLE: India's series of interventions arrest domestic spike in palm oil prices
URL: https://www.sentinelassam.com/business/indias-series-of-interventions-arrest-domestic-spike-in-palm-oil-prices-569841

NEW DELHI: Even though the prices of Malaysian crude palm oil shot up sharply, the price of the Indian product did not follow the same trend in 2021 due to the government's intervention.
Widely used in edible oil blending, cosmetics, processed food products, and even in biofuel, palm oil's prices on Bursa Malaysia Derivatives is considered to be the global benchmark among trade circles.
Crude palm oil prices on the BMD rose 27 per cent during the year-to-date period in 2021 to around 4,949 ringgits (Rs 88,443), while on Multi Commodity Exchange of India, it rose just over 10 per cent to Rs 1,115 rupees per 10 kg.
The steady and inconsistent rise in prices on the MCX, to an extent, can be attributed to the Indian government's slew of interventions.
In June, the Central government removed import restrictions on refined bleached deodorised palm oil, refined bleached deodorised palmolein, and another variant (palm oil and its fractions, whether or not refined, but not chemically modified) till December 31, 2021, which has now now been extended till the end of 2022.
Besides, it on Monday reduced the basic customs duty on refined palm oil from 17.5 per cent to 12.5 per cent till March 2022 as part of the measures it is taking to bring down edible oil rates in the Indian markets.
With this duty cut, net effective duty comes down to 13.75 per cent against 19.25 per cent earlier, according to industry players.
In addition, the government on Monday suspended trade in futures contracts of several agricultural commodities, including of crude palm oil, for one year.
Macro-data, released earlier this month, showed that higher prices of commodities, food items and fuels lifted India's November consumer and wholesale inflation numbers. CPI inflation jumped to three-months high of 4.9 per cent which was led by higher core inflation.
Oil palm kernel is crushed to extract crude palm oil and subsequently processed to make refined palm oil. (IANS)
Also Watch:

ARTICLE 163
TITLE: Indonesia bans palm oil export, world to face jitters
URL: https://www.dnaindia.com/world/report-indonesia-bans-palm-oil-export-world-to-face-jitters-2947836

WORLD
The decision to ban palm oil export by Indonesia has triggered price shockwaves across the globe.
Indonesia has decided to ban the export of palm oil from April 28, the country’s President Joko Widodo announced on Friday. Widodo said the decision has been taken to control skyrocketing domestic prices and ensure availability of food products at home. “I will monitor and evaluate the implementation of this policy so availability of cooking oil in the domestic market becomes abundant and affordable,” he said in a video address.
Indonesia is the world’s biggest exporter of palm oil. On February 21, we had reported how one litre of palm oil was selling for up to Rs 22,000 Indonesian rupiah! The country introduced restrictions on palm oil exports in late January, but lifted them in March – a move that sent global prices to historic highs.
India has been adversely affected by increasing prices of palm oil as well, for it is one of the biggest importers of vegetable oil. India imports nearly 60 per cent of its edible oil, and palm oil comprises 60 per cent of this demand. Indonesia supplies around half of our palm oil requirements and the crisis in this Southeast Asian country has upped edible oil prices in India by 20-25 per cent already – with the ban expected to push up prices further.
Till a few years back, Indonesia alone supplied close to 65 per cent of India’s palm oil demands. Since last year, however, Malaysia partially surpassed it, after Indonesia imposed heavy taxes on palm oil exports. In March 2022, India imported a total of 10,51,698 tonnes of edible oil against 9,57,633 tonnes in March 2021 – a rise of nearly 10 per cent.
The decision to ban palm oil export by Indonesia has triggered price shockwaves across the globe, and prices of soya, refined and sunflower oil are expected to soar soon. According to the Chicago Board of Trade, soya oil prices have already spiked by 4 per cent.
Indonesia is the second Asian country after Sri Lanka to reel under severe inflation. The biggest reason for the sky-rocketing price of palm oil is the Russia-Ukraine war. Both countries are said to be the biggest producers of sunflower and soyabean oil and together produce 80 per cent of the global demand. But with supply stopped since the start of the war on February 24, the world has turned towards the closest substitute, i.e. palm oil. And this has increased the global demand for palm oil, leading to more exports than usual for Indonesia.
On the other hand, when Indonesian authorities tried to control prices of palm oil, it led to increased hoarding. The government had fixed the price of branded oil to 14,000 Indonesian rupiah and that of crude palm oil to 9,300 Indonesian rupiah. At the same time, one person was allowed to but only 2 litres of palm oil at once and exporters were instructed to sell 30 per cent of the produce in the domestic market. But traders opposed the move, and thus began increased hoarding.

ARTICLE 164
TITLE: Tough times ahead for Indian edible oil consumers as Indonesia bans export of edible oils
URL: https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/economy/agri-business/tough-times-ahead-for-indian-edible-oil-consumers-as-indonesia-bans-export-of-edible-oils/article65345290.ece

There appears to be no respite for the Indian consumers on the edible oil front. Consumers should brace themselves for difficult times ahead, as Indonesia, India’s main source of palm oil imports, banned exports of all edible oil raw materials on Friday to ease domestic shortage.
Indonesian President Joko Widodo announced on Friday the suspension of all cooking oil and raw material exports from April 28 until further orders. The decision comes in the midst of a severe shortage and skyrocketing prices for edible oils in the South-East Asian nation.
This is expected to aggrevate the Indian edible oil market , which is already reeling from inflation amidst post-Covid consumption push coupled with the Ramadan period and marriage season.
"This uncalled-for action (by Indonesia) has got massive repercussions for India. Local prices in Indonesia may fall as a result of this decision, but prices in India may skyrocket. It is going to be a difficult time," Atul Chaturvedi, President, Solvent Extractors' Association of India (SEA) told Businessline.
Oil imports to India
India imports about 8.3 million tonnes of palm oil including crude palm oil (CPO), Palmolein and PFAD (Palm Fatty Acid Distillate), nearly half or which(4 million tonnes) comes from Indonesia. Malaysia is the second largest source of palm oil (3.8 million tonnes), with Thailand accounting for the remaining half-a-million.
Edible oil prices have been on the rise due to disruptions in sunflower oil since the outbreak of the Ukraine-Russia crisis. The latest development from Indonesia is feared to have an impact on the prices. CPO prices are already up by 15 per cent from $1,594 per tonne (CIF Indian port) to $1,828 since February 2022. This has had an effect on non-palm oils, such as Crude sunflower oil, which has increased by 41 per cent from $1,506 to $2,125 in the past one month.
However, Sudhakar Rao Desai, President of the Indian Vegetable Oil Producers' Association (IVPA raised doubts about the sustenance of the Indonesian decision as the country may find it difficult to handle huge quantities of palm oil it produces. "Indonesia exports nearly 20 lakh tonnes of palm oil per month. Given the storage constraints in Indonesia, I don't think they would be able to sustain after fifteen days. I don't see much panic," he said.
Edible oil expert, Govindbhai G Patel from Rajkot, maintained that to ease the possible supply shortage and control the price rise situation, there would be a requirement of diplomatic intervention besides the tax measures of removal of the existing five per cent import duty on edible oils. “This may give some breather till the situation normalises,” he said.
Published on April 22, 2022

ARTICLE 165
TITLE: Indonesia Bans Palm Oil Exports As Global Food Inflation Spikes
URL: https://www.businessworld.in/article/Indonesia-Bans-Palm-Oil-Exports-As-Global-Food-Inflation-Spikes/23-04-2022-426300

Former Uttar Pradesh Chief Secretary and author Alok Ranjan argues that India’s development journey must move beyond economic output to focus on happiness, quality of life, education, healthcare and inclusive growth
India's big securities fraud charge was built by comparing a gold refinery's gross sales turnover to its processing margin alone — and SEBI's own order contains the table that makes the question unavoidable. Then comes the ex-parte action after 20 months of open investigation, a forensic audit conducted on 2% of the evidence, and directions so mild they barely register the severity of the charge.
SEBI's own document defeats SEBI. The regulator has advanced India's largest securities allegation while its own order cannot specify what, exactly, it is charging.
Meta will acquire about a 20 per cent minority stake in CRED and Shah will step down from his operating role as chief executive officer of CRED and join Meta’s global leadership team
The index of eight core industries (ICI) increased by 0.5 per cent in May 2026, as compared to a final growth rate of 1.8 per cent in April 2026
The Union Budget 2026–27 allocated Rs 1,000 crore toward India Semiconductor Mission (ISM) 2.0, while the government has already approved 10 ISM projects worth Rs 1.60 lakh crore across six states. India’s semiconductor market is also projected to reach $100–110 billion by 2030, underlining the scale of the opportunity ahead
Former Uttar Pradesh Chief Secretary and author Alok Ranjan argues that India’s development journey must move beyond economic output to focus on happiness, quality of life, education, healthcare and inclusive growth
India's big securities fraud charge was built by comparing a gold refinery's gross sales turnover to its processing margin alone — and SEBI's own order contains the table that makes the question unavoidable. Then comes the ex-parte action after 20 months of open investigation, a forensic audit conducted on 2% of the evidence, and directions so mild they barely register the severity of the charge.
SEBI's own document defeats SEBI. The regulator has advanced India's largest securities allegation while its own order cannot specify what, exactly, it is charging.
Meta will acquire about a 20 per cent minority stake in CRED and Shah will step down from his operating role as chief executive officer of CRED and join Meta’s global leadership team
The index of eight core industries (ICI) increased by 0.5 per cent in May 2026, as compared to a final growth rate of 1.8 per cent in April 2026
The Union Budget 2026–27 allocated Rs 1,000 crore toward India Semiconductor Mission (ISM) 2.0, while the government has already approved 10 ISM projects worth Rs 1.60 lakh crore across six states. India’s semiconductor market is also projected to reach $100–110 billion by 2030, underlining the scale of the opportunity ahead
Former Uttar Pradesh Chief Secretary and author Alok Ranjan argues that India’s development journey must move beyond economic output to focus on happiness, quality of life, education, healthcare and inclusive growth
India's big securities fraud charge was built by comparing a gold refinery's gross sales turnover to its processing margin alone — and SEBI's own order contains the table that makes the question unavoidable. Then comes the ex-parte action after 20 months of open investigation, a forensic audit conducted on 2% of the evidence, and directions so mild they barely register the severity of the charge.
SEBI's own document defeats SEBI. The regulator has advanced India's largest securities allegation while its own order cannot specify what, exactly, it is charging.
Former Uttar Pradesh Chief Secretary and author Alok Ranjan argues that India’s development journey must move beyond economic output to focus on happiness, quality of life, education, healthcare and inclusive growth
Raj Thackeray Entered The Kohinoor Deal When The Money Came In. He Left Before It Burned And Losses Came In. ED questioned him for 8.5 hours. Maharashtra Is Still Waiting For An Explanation. Raj Thackeray's Kohinoor story remains one of Maharashtra’s least examined financial mysteries.
Subscribe to our newsletter to get updates on our latest news
Subscribe to our newsletter to get updates on our latest news

ARTICLE 166
TITLE: Cooking oil prices may go up by Rs 3-5 per kg as Indonesia bans palm oil exports
URL: https://www.newindianexpress.com/business/2022/apr/23/cooking-oil-prices-may-go-up-by-rs-3-5-per-kg-as-indonesia-bans-palm-oil-exports-2445679.html

NEW DELHI: The edible oil prices may go up by Rs 3-5 a kg in India immediately after the Indonesian government announced a ban on exports of palm oil due to shortage in the local markets.
Though the ban applies from 28 April 2022, traders and edible oil manufacturers in India see prices of all edible oils going up by Rs 3,000-5,000 per tonne in the immediate term as the ban has disrupted the sentiments.
Indonesia is the largest producer and exporter of palm oil. It produces 48 million tonnes (MT) of palm oil annually of which 17 MT is used locally and the rest is exported. India imports around 4 million tonnes of palm oil from Indonesia.
"With the shortage of palm oil, prices of all edible oil would shoot up in India as the prices (of edible oils) move in tandem," said Dr VB Mehta, executive director of The Solvent Extractors' Association of India (SEA of India).
He says that the real impact (of the news) would be felt only on Monday when the markets open, but initial reports indicate the sellers might increase the retail prices by Rs 3,000-5,000 per tonne. The Indonesia export ban would come as a double whammy for consumers as edible oil prices have been increasing ever since geo-political tensions began in eastern Europe.
Most edible oil prices have seen a 20-25 per cent jump in prices over the past one year. Sunflower, Mustard and groundnut oils are available at Rs 185-190 per kg in the retail market. Retail palm oil prices are hovering around Rs 155 per kg in Delhi.

ARTICLE 167
TITLE: Podcast | Why Indonesia’s move to ban edible oil export is bad news for India
URL: https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/multimedia/audio/podcast-why-indonesias-move-to-ban-edible-oil-export-is-bad-news-for-india/article65347606.ece

Indonesia, India’s main source of palm oil imports, banned exports of all edible oil raw materials on Friday to ease the domestic shortage. Indonesian President Joko Widodo suspended all cooking oil and raw material exports from April 28 until further orders.
This move is expected to add more stress to the Indian edible oil market, which is already reeling from inflation. How will this affect you? Rutam Vora talks to Sudhakar Rao Desai, President of the Indian Vegetable Oil Producers’ Association, in this podcast. Listen in.
More Like This
Published on April 23, 2022

ARTICLE 168
TITLE: Edible oil prices may hike in India as Indonesia bans export of palm oil
URL: https://www.dnaindia.com/india/report-edible-oil-prices-may-hike-in-india-as-indonesia-bans-export-of-palm-oil-2948066

INDIA
India imports roughly 80 lakh tonnes of palm oil from Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand annually.
The already high prices for edible oil since the Ukraine-Russia war broke out will get an added fuel as Indonesia – world’s largest producer and supplier of palm oil -- has announced a ban on its export from April 28.
India imports roughly 80 lakh tonnes of palm oil from Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand annually. Of the approximate six lakh tonnes per month import, almost three lakh tonnes come from Indonesia, according to Solvent Extractors` Association (SEA).
Although the export ban will be effective five days later, it has already created a buzz in the Indian market with traders wary of the impending shortfall and price hike. "This (decision) has come as a fuel in the fire. We already had a worrying situation due to the Ukraine-Russia war and now this. The gap is too wide to bridge," said Solvent Extractors` Association (SEA) executive director B.V. Mehta.
Stating that Indonesia already has half a million tonnes storage with four lakh tonnes coming in each month, Mehta said: "It will be hard for them (Indonesia) to continue this for long. I am sure they will open up soon."
Echoed Suresh Nagpal, chairperson of the Central Organisation for Oil Industry & Trade (COOIT): "Indonesia supplies almost 60-70 per cent of the world`s palm oil. There is some supply chain disruption in their country and hence this is a panic decision by that government. I am sure; they would reverse the decision in about 10-15 days."
Even when there is no trade on the commodities exchange over the weekend, the palm oil prices have already shown an increase of Rs 3,000-5,000.
"The market opening on Monday morning will show the real impact. We have also requested the government of India to initiate G-to-G talks with Indonesia," Mehta said.
It was not immediately clear what are the steps the government has planned. Phone calls and text messages to Food Secretary Sudhanshu Pandey went unanswered.
Earlier, to prevent the edible prices from soaring high -- and incidentally, days before the Russia-Ukraine war broke out -- the government had reduced the agri-cess for Crude Palm Oil (CPO) from 7.5 per cent to 5 per cent with effect from February 12, 2022.
After the reduction of the agri-cess, the import tax gap between CPO and Refined Palm Oil has increased to 8.25 per cent. The increase in the gap between the CPO and Refined Palm Oil will benefit the domestic refining industry to import Crude Oil for refining.
Another pre-emptive step was to extend the then-current basic rate of import duty of zero per cent on Crude Palm Oil, Crude Soybean oil and Crude Sunflower Oil up to September 30, 2022.
The government has also imposed a stock limit in February, which was first extended till March-end, June end and now till September end in order to prevent hoarding and black marketing of edible oils.

ARTICLE 169
TITLE: Edible oil industry suggests government initiate dialogue with Indonesia over palm oil ban 
URL: https://www.newindianexpress.com/business/2022/apr/25/edible-oil-industry-suggests-government-initiate-dialogue-with-indonesia-over-palm-oil-ban-2446303.html

KOLKATTA: The cooking oil national industry body -- Solvent Extractors' Association (SEA) of India has suggested immediate initiation of government to government (G2G) dialogue with Indonesia on the proposed palm oil export ban from April 28 by them as it would have an adverse repercussions in India.
Indonesia, which is the world's largest producer of palm oil and meets nearly 50 per cent of the total palm oil requirement in India annually, had announced to ban exports till further notice apparently to contain edible oil prices in their domestic market.
"We have suggested our government initiate dialogue with Indonesian counterparts at the highest diplomatic level on the cooking oil export ban. This will have serious repercussions in our domestic market as half of our total imports of palm oil is from Indonesia and no one can fill up this void," SEA director-general B V Mehta told PTI.
SEA liaisons with the Union Food ministry, he said. Mehta said, "the industry was not expecting a ban. There will be an immediate impact on prices in the domestic market from Monday itself as the news of the ban has distorted the sentiment."
The cooking oil industry was prepared for a tweak in export duty at worst by Indonesia which is grappling with its cooking oil price spike in their domestic market by about 40-50 per cent. Indonesia was levying USD 575 per tonne export duty.
"The news will push Malaysia oil prices higher which is our major alternate sourcing market," Mehta said. "India consumes 22.5 million tonnes of edible oil annually of which 9-9.5 million tonnes is met by domestic supplies and the rest by imports. About 3.5-4 million tonnes of palm oil is imported by India annually from Indonesia," he said.
With the Ukraine war, the sunflower and soybean oil is already under pressure as imports have halved but the situation was managed with other variants of oils.
But, the Indonesian oil ban will have a "devastating effect" unless sorted out quickly, an edible oil refiner official said.
The last Indian Economic Survey had blamed rising price of oil and fats and it was a major driver of inflation in the foods and beverages category in the fiscal FY'22 Oil and fats contributed to around 60 per cent of food and beverages inflation in the country, despite having a weight of only 7.8 per cent in the basket.
Inflation both at the retail and wholesale levels for edible oil had begun in Q4FY19-20 and still continues.
The Wholesale Price Index or WPI -based inflation already surged to 14.55 per cent in March 2022, after a 13.11 per cent reading in February 2022.
Edible oils such as palm oil are a key raw material for FMCG and HoReCa (hotels, restaurants and caterers) industries and a rise in the prices of these commodities impacts consumer goods beyond food products such as soaps, shampoos, etc.

ARTICLE 170
TITLE: Palm oil price to spike in India as Indonesia’s export ban leaves global buyers in limbo
URL: https://www.thehindu.com/business/Economy/indonesia-export-ban-leaves-global-buyers-in-limbo/article65353014.ece

Global edible oil consumers have no option but to pay top dollar for supplies after Indonesia's surprise palm oil export ban forced buyers to seek alternatives, already in short supply due to adverse weather and Russia's invasion of Ukraine.
The move by the world's biggest palm oil producer to ban exports from Thursday will lift prices of all major edible oils including palm oil, soy oil, sunflower oil, and rapeseed oil, industry watchers predict. That will place extra strain on cost-sensitive consumers in Asia and Africa hit by higher fuel and food prices.
"Indonesia's decision affects not only palm oil availability, but vegetable oils worldwide," James Fry, chairman of commodities consultancy LMC International, told Reuters.
Palm oil - used in everything from cakes and frying fats to cosmetics and cleaning products - accounts for nearly 60% of global vegetable oil shipments, and top producer Indonesia accounts for around a third of all vegetable oil exports. It announced the export ban on April 22, until further notice, in a move to tackle rising domestic prices.
"This is happening when the export tonnages of all other major oils are under pressure: soybean oil due to droughts in South America; rapeseed oil due to disastrous canola crops in Canada; and sunflower oil because of Russia's war on Ukraine," Mr. Fry said.
Vegetable oil prices have already risen more than 50% in the past six months as factors from labour shortages in Malaysia to droughts in Argentina and Canada - the biggest exporters of soy oil and canola oil respectively - curtailed supplies.
Buyers were hoping a bumper sunflower crop from top exporter Ukraine would ease the tightness, but supplies from Kyiv have stopped because of what Russia calls its "special operation" in the country.
This had prompted importers to bank on palm oil being able to plug the supply gap until Indonesia's shock ban delivered a "double whammy" to buyers, said Atul Chaturvedi, president of trade body the Solvent Extractors Association of India (SEA).
No Alternative
Importers such as India, Bangladesh, and Pakistan will try to increase palm oil purchases from Malaysia, but the world's second-biggest palm oil producer cannot fill the gap created by Indonesia, Chaturvedi said.
Indonesia typically supplies nearly half of India's total palm oil imports, while Pakistan and Bangladesh import nearly 80% of their palm oil from Indonesia.
"Nobody can compensate for the loss of Indonesian palm oil. Every country is going to suffer," said Rasheed JanMohd, chairman of Pakistan Edible Oil Refiners Association (PEORA).
In February, prices of vegetable oils jumped to a record high as sunflower oil supplies were disrupted from the Black Sea region.
The price rise raised working capital requirements for oil refiners, who were holding lower inventories than normal in anticipation of a pullback in prices, said a Mumbai-based dealer with a global trading firm.
Instead, all oil prices have rallied further. "Refiners have been caught on the wrong foot. Now they can't afford to wait for a few weeks. They have to make purchases to run plants," the dealer said.
As Indonesia has allowed loading until April 28, consuming countries will have enough supply for the first half of May, but could face shortages from the second half, said a refiner based in Dhaka.
South Asian refiners will only slowly release oil into the market as they know supplies are limited, he said.
In India, the world's biggest vegetable oil importer, palm oil prices rose by nearly 5% over the weekend as industry prices in shortages in the coming months. Prices also rose in Pakistan and Bangladesh.
Published - April 25, 2022 02:51 pm IST

ARTICLE 171
TITLE: Explained | Why did Indonesia ban palm oil exports and how will it affect India?
URL: https://www.thehindu.com/news/international/indonesia-palm-oil-export-ban-and-india-impact/article65350522.ece

The story so far: Indonesia, the world’s biggest producer, exporter, and consumer of palm oil, would be banning all exports of the commodity and its raw materials from April 28 to reduce domestic shortages of cooking oil and bring down its skyrocketing prices, the country’s President, Joko Widodo, announced on Friday, April 22, 2022.
Indonesian Finance Minister Sri Mulyani Indrawati said the move would hit supplies of palm oil in other countries and was "among the harshest moves" the government undertook to stabilise the price of cooking oil in the country, calling it necessary nonetheless.
This announcement came amid already surging global food prices as a consequence of the ongoing Russia-Ukraine conflict. Food prices rose by nearly 13% globally in March according to the United Nations. It also came on the same day that policymakers raised global food security concerns at the spring meetings of the World Bank and International Monetary Fund in Washington D.C., emphasising that countries should avoid hoarding food stocks and refrain from exercising export controls.
How important is palm oil to global supply chains?
Palm oil is the world’s most widely used vegetable oil with its global production in the year 2020 being over 73 million tonnes (MT), according to the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA). It is estimated to be 77 million tonnes for the current year. Made from the African oil palm, it is used as cooking oil, and in everything from cosmetics, processed foods, cakes, chocolates, spreads, soaps, shampoo, and cleaning products to biofuel.
The oil palm industry has come under criticism for what are reportedly unsustainable production practices leading to deforestation, and exploitative labour practices carried forward from the colonial era. However, palm oil is preferred by many as it is inexpensive; oil palms produce more oil per hectare than some other vegetable oil plants like soybean.
Indonesia and Malaysia together account for almost 90% of the global palm oil production, with Indonesia producing the largest quantity at over 45 million tonnes in 2021.
According to Reuters, palm oil makes up 40% of the global supply of the four most widely used edible oils: palm, soybean, rapeseed (canola), and sunflower oil. Indonesia is responsible for 60% of the global supply of palm oil. India is the biggest importer of palm oil.
Why are the prices of edible oils rising?
The prices of palm oil rose this year as demand increased because of the short supply of alternative vegetable oils. The production of soybean oil, the second most-produced oil, is expected to take a hit this year due to a poor soybean season in major producer Argentina. The production of canola oil was hit in Canada last year due to drought; and supplies of sunflower oil, 80-90% of which is produced by Russia and Ukraine, has been badly hit by the ongoing conflict .
Consumers across the globe have been bearing the brunt of these factors and the pandemic driving up global edible oil prices to record highs.
After Indonesia’s unprecedented announcement to ban palm oil exports altogether, global markets of other vegetable oils saw spikes. The price of soybean oil on April 22, saw a 4.5% rise, taking it to a record high of 83.21 cents per pound on the Chicago Board of Trade. Soy oil prices have already seen a 50% rise so far this year.
How bad is Indonesia’s palm oil crisis?
Indonesia uses palm oil for cooking purposes. The palm oil used for cooking is made by processing crude palm oil (CPO). Due to short supply of alternative vegetable oils, lower-than -expected output from second-biggest palm oil producer Malaysia due to pandemic-induced labour shortage, and the global food inflation linked to the pandemic and the Ukraine crisis, the global prices of CPO had risen significantly since the end of last year.
The price of CPO rose from an already high rate of $1,131 per metric tonne in 2021 to its highest ever price of $1,552 in February this year. The global rise affected the price of palm oil in Indonesia, which sells two types of cooking oil — expensive branded cooking oil and cheaper non-branded oil in bulk. The country saw the price of branded palm oil go from 14,000 Indonesian rupiah (IDR) per litre in March 2021, to 22,000 IDR in March this year.
In order to make cooking oil affordable, the Indonesian government introduced price caps in late January; deciding that the MRP of branded oil could not exceed 14,000 IDR, while that of the local product would remain at 11,500 IDR. The issue of consumers hoarding the commodity and reports of it being resold, made the government introduce a two-litre-per-person rule for buying cooking oil. Some sellers were inking the fingers of consumers, as done during voting, to ensure that they don’t buy twice.
Amid reports of hoarding of cooking oil by consumers and producers, and producers being discouraged from making more oil owing to the gap between rising global prices and capped prices at home, Indonesia, the biggest palm oil maker, started witnessing an acute shortage of cooking oil.
To meet domestic demands, the government announced another policy called domestic market obligation (DMO), under which it required CPO exporters to sell 20% of export volume domestically, at a fixed price of 9,300 IDR per kg. This was later increased to 30% of the export volume for domestic use.
These policies, observers said, had an inverse effect on the domestic supply as the price controls and domestic quotas became ineffective amid the global price rise. The government retracted the price caps and export quota in late March but introduced a tax on exports, should the global prices go beyond $1,500 per metric tonne.
Indonesian Trade Minister Muhammad Lutfi also accused producers of engaging in illegal hoarding and cartel practices and of acquiring illicit export permits amid the export restrictions. Investigations into both these matters are currently underway in the country.
The cooking oil shortage could in part also be attributed to Indonesia using large quantities of crude palm oil in making biodiesel, which it has branded as ‘green diesel’, despite palm oil production being known to be environmentally degrading. In late 2019, the country increased the palm oil content to be used in biodiesel to 30%. Reuters reported that it used over seven million tonnes of palm oil out of its total national output of 41.4 million tonnes in 2020, on biodiesel.
How will it impact India?
India is the biggest importer of palm oil, which makes up 40% of its vegetable oil consumption, as per the USDA. India meets half of its annual need for 8.3 million tonnes of palm oil from Indonesia. Last year, the Centre also unveiled its plan to boost India’s domestic palm oil production.
Already grappling with record-high wholesale inflation, the late January export controls exercised by Indonesia had led to a 38% rise in the landed cost of CPO in India. The price of soybean oil, most consumed after palm, rose by 29% in the country this year; while sunflower oil, 90% of which India gets from Russia and Ukraine, stopped coming in almost completely.
Amid this situation, India had requested Indonesia in March to increase palm oil shipments to make up for the short supply and expensive alternatives. Despite the rising prices of the commodity, India’s palm oil imports jumped 21% in March from the previous month as traders moved to secure alternatives to sunflower oil that could no longer be bought from Ukraine, four dealers told Reuters.
After the ban was announced by Indonesia, Atul Chaturvedi, president of the Solvent Extractors' Association of India told The Hindu Business Line: "This uncalled-for action (by Indonesia) has got massive repercussions for India. Local prices in Indonesia may fall as a result of this decision, but prices in India may skyrocket. It is going to be a difficult time."
Published - April 25, 2022 07:24 pm IST

ARTICLE 172
TITLE: Indonesia export ban will not include crude palm oil, says sources
URL: https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/economy/agri-business/indonesia-export-ban-will-not-include-crude-palm-oil-says-sources/article65353700.ece

Indonesian Government officials told palm oil companies on Monday that an export ban announced late last week would cover shipments of refined, bleached, deodorized (RBD) palmolein but not crude palm oil, two industry sources told Reuters.
Officials at the trade ministry and coordinating ministry of economic affairs did not immediately respond to requests for comment.
Traders were caught by surprise by Friday's announcement by President Joko Widodo that Indonesia, the world's biggest palm oil producer, was halting exports of the edible oil from April 28, to ensure domestic food product availability.
Though an exemption of crude palm oil from the export curbs will be positive for global markets, the majority of Indonesia's palm exports are in the form of processed oils and remain affected by the ban.
Global edible oil supplies were already choked by adverse weather and Russia's invasion of major crop producer Ukraine, and now global consumers have no option but to pay top dollar for supplies at a time when global food inflation has soared to a record high.
Crude palm futures fall
Malaysian benchmark crude palm futures fell 2.09% after news that ban only covers RBD palmolein, having jumped nearly 7% to their highest in six weeks. "The massive short covering fizzled out after hearing news that the ban only encompasses olein both bulk and packed from Indonesia," said Paramalingam Supramaniam, director at Selangor-based brokerage Pelindung Bestari.
He said there were still concerns that crude palm oil would also be added to the list of banned products as it is raw material for RBD palmolein.
According to Refinitiv Eikon, Indonesia exported an average of roughly 6,20,000 tonnes per month of RBD in 2021, compared to an average of around 100,000 tonnes of crude palm oil. Top destinations included India and Pakistan and Spain.
The government's move to control stubbornly high cooking oil prices caused a slump in shares of its biggest palm oil companies on Monday, while the rupiah headed currency falls in Asia. Dollar-denominated bonds issued by Indonesia's government fell more than 1 cent to their lowest since the Spring 2020 Covid market rout.
According to data from Indonesia's palm oil association (GAPKI) exports of processed CPO in 2021 stood at 25.7 million tonnes, or 75% of total exports of palm products. CPO exports were 2.74 million tonnes in 2021, or 7.98% of the shipments.
In January and February this year, processed CPO exports were 3.38 million tonnes or 79% of exports, while CPO exports were 90,000 tonnes, 2% of the total shipped.
Global prices of crude palm oil, which Indonesia uses for cooking oil, have surged to historic highs this year amid rising demand and weak output from top producers Indonesia and Malaysia, plus a move by Indonesia to restrict palm oil exports in January that was lifted in March.
Published on April 25, 2022

ARTICLE 173
TITLE: No ban on crude palm oil export, says Indonesia 
URL: https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/economy/agri-business/no-ban-on-crude-palmoil-export-says-indonesia/article65354412.ece

Bengaluru/Mangaluru, April 25
Indonesia on Monday clarified that its export ban on palm oil, to come into force from April 28, will not cover crude palm oil, providing much relief to importing nations such as India that depend on imports of edible oils to meet their domestic demand.
Agencies reported that Indonesia government officials told palm oil companies that the ban would apply only to refined, bleached and deodourised (RBD) palmolein, though trade ministry officials in Jakarta failed to respond on requests for clarification.
In India, the report of Indonesia’s decision was greeted with relief by the industry terming it as “better senses prevailed”.
The Solvent Extractors Association of India (SEA) said it was yet to get any official information from the Indonesian government. BV Mehta, Executive Director, SEA, said the development is good for Indian edible oil industry.
“I think better senses prevailed in Indonesia also. Otherwise, the market would have been on a fire,” he said.
On Monday, the Malaysian Derivatives Exchange (MDEX) saw crude palm oil open higher by nearly seven per cent. Once the reality of the decision, announced by Indonesian President Joko Widodo on April 23 shocking the global market, sunk in, the commodity pared its gains to close two per cent lower at 6,222 Malaysian riniggit a tonne ($1,428.70/₹1.09 lakh).
The Indonesian decision had the industry and Centre on tenterhooks as already cooking oil prices have been surging continuously since last year. India’s wholesale price index inflation rose to a record 14.95 per cent in March.
Russia-Ukraine conflict
Most of India’s inflation has been imported with the Russia-Ukraine war further compounding it. Cooking oil prices have been soaring on supply shortage globally due to lower soyabean production in South America and palm oil output in South-East Asia. Jakarta decision only stoked it further.
Flaring up of crude oil prices have also aided the surge in prices of cooking oils and foodgrains. The Indian government has also run out of options by reducing import duties to maximum possible limits and controlling the retail price fixed by processors.
The decision, in a way, hurt processors as import of refined oil had become more viable than importing crude oils. In the case of palm oil, the export tax imposed by Malaysia and Indonesia hurt the processors further. Of late, imports of RBD palmolein have been increasing due to these policy measures.
Mehta said refined palm oil export to India had touched over 30 per cent of total palm oil imports in the last five months, thereby reducing capacity utilization of Indian refiners.
India to gain
Indonesia curbs on exports of RBD palmolein could be a blessing in a disguise for Indian processors. India’s imports of palm oil have been changing in tune with the policies here and in South-East Asia, which prefer its refining units capacity to be utilised.
SEA data show that India imported 4.74 lakh tonnes (lt) of RBD palmolein from Indonesia during November-March of the current oil year to October against 4,900 tonnes in year-ago period. The import of CPO from Indonesia stood at 5.01 lt during November-March of the oil year 2021-22 against 12.95 lt in the year-ago period.
Mehta said India needs more CPO and not RBD palmolein. “India will be comfortable if CPO is allowed. That is the reason why the market which went up by 600 points in the morning is now hardly about 100 points up,” he said.
In case, India needs RBD palmolein, it can always import from Malaysia, he added.
In a representation to the government on April 21, SEA had stated that Indonesia has imposed export tax + levy of $575 a tonne on CPO, $408 a tonne on RBD palmolein and $386 a tonne for refined palm oil.
This had made palmolein cheaper than CPO by about 5 per cent at their current prices. SEA said Indonesia was incentivising exports of finished product (refined palmolein) at the cost of raw material (CPO).
Soyabean Processors Association of India Executive Director DN Pathak said: “We have heard that Indonesia has now excluded crude palm oil from the export ban. If that has happened, it is very good thing as in an already tight market, a ban on CPO would have tightened supplies further. However, we are awaiting more clarity.”
(with agency inputs)
Published on April 25, 2022

ARTICLE 174
TITLE: Palm oil soars on Indonesia ban in risk to global food inflation
URL: https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/economy/agri-business/palm-oil-soars-on-indonesia-ban-in-risk-to-global-food-inflation/article65352928.ece

Palm oil rallied after top producer Indonesia said it will ban all exports of cooking oil, a move that threatens to worsen global food inflation. Futures for July delivery rose as much as 6 per cent to 6,738 ringgit ($1,550) a ton in Kuala Lumpur, the highest since March 11.
Indonesia said on Friday that the shipment halt will start from April 28 and last until the government deems a domestic shortage resolved.
The move by Indonesia, which accounts for almost 60 per cent of global palm oil supply, adds to a raft of crop protectionism around the world since the war erupted in Ukraine, as governments seek to protect their own food supply with agriculture prices surging.
The ban threatens to further stoke global food inflation, which has been accelerating at a rampant pace, and raises the risk of a full-blown hunger crisis.
Global impact
“The halting of shipments of the cooking oil and its raw material, widely used in products ranging from cakes to cosmetics, could raise costs for packaged food producers globally,” said Avtar Sandu, senior manager of commodities at Phillip Nova.
The surprise move has “left many questions unanswered especially as it comes at a time when other edible oils like sunflower oil supplies are facing issues due to violence in the Black Sea region,” he added.
While limited supply and soaring prices are set to worsen inflation of food items like salad dressing and mayonnaise in wealthy economies like the US, developing nations like India are set to feel the worst impacts.
Such countries depend on imports of palm oil as a cheaper alternative to more costly soybean, sunflower and canola oil.
More Like This
Published on April 25, 2022

ARTICLE 175
TITLE: FMCG  firms worry as palm oil ban to hit margins 
URL: https://www.newindianexpress.com/business/2022/apr/26/fmcg-firms-worry-as-palm-oil-ban-to-hit-margins-2446593.html

NEW DELHI: There is another blow for the FMCG industry with Indonesia, the largest exporter of palm oil, announcing a ban on its exports. As it is a key ingredient for food processing industries, the ban is expected to further escalate cost of products and impact margins of consumer companies.
Analysts say FMCG majors like ITC, Britannia, Hindustan Unilever, would be among the firms will be affected directly. This move is likely to cause a price increase in other edible oils like soybean oil, sunflower oil, according to Amnish Aggarwal - Director - Research at Prabhudas Lilladher.
“We believe the impact would be seen most in categories such as biscuits, noodles, cakes, potato chips, frozen desserts etc. QSRs like Westlife Development and Burger King can also feel the pinch given edible oil usage to cook/fry their patties/fries,” said Aggarwal.
Palm oil, which is cheaper as compared to other edible oils, makes for 60% of oil imports and Indonesia is the second-largest seller after Malaysia. India will be affected by the ban as it is the world’s largest importer of the oil. In 2020-2021, India imported 13.13 MT of edible oil, of which palm oil was at 8.18 MT. Pankaj Agarwal, COO, Bikano, said it is a point of worry for all snack majors in India.
“Palm oil is one of the important ingredients in our products. We faced similar issues in the past two years. However, we have not raised the prices of any of our products. With the given situation, we will have to look at some alternative options like rice bran oil and cottonseed oil or might increase the prices of.”
On the other hand, there are reports coming in that the ban excludes crude palm oil and RBD (refined, bleached and deodorized) oil from export.

ARTICLE 176
TITLE: Explained: Indonesia’s surprise palm oil export ban and its impact on consumers of India
URL: https://www.oneindia.com/india/explained-indonesia-s-surprise-palm-oil-export-ban-and-its-impact-on-consumers-of-india-3400727.html

New Delhi, Apr 26: Indonesia, which is the world's largest producer of palm oil and meets nearly 50 per cent of the total palm oil requirement in India annually, had announced to ban exports till further notice apparently to contain edible oil prices in their domestic market.
Why did Indonesia ban palm oil exports?
Indonesia's decision to halt exports is driven by the political situation in the country. Indonesian President imposed the export ban citing rising inflation and wanting to ensure the availability of food products at home following Russia's invasion of Ukraine. The move is anticipated to give
Inflation is on the rise and President Joko Widodo's rivals are winning the popularity battle.
Should India worry?
It shoould be noted that India procures nearly half of its palm oil imports from Indonesia, while Pakistan and Bangladesh import nearly 80 per cent. Indonesia was levying USD 575 per tonne export duty.
And now ever since the ban buyers like India has limited alternatives.
Experts believe that importers such as India will try to increase palm oil purchases from Malaysia, which is our major alternate sourcing market. But the world's second-biggest palm oil producer will fail to fill the gap created by Indonesia.
"Nobody can compensate for the loss of Indonesian palm oil. Every country is going to suffer," said Rasheed JanMohd, chairman of Pakistan Edible oil Refiners Association (PEORA).
What does the ban mean for India?
The move by the world's biggest palm oil producer to ban exports from Thursday will increase prices of all major edible oils including palm oil, soyoil, sunflower oil and rapeseed oil, which are already at an all-time high, will go through the roof.
That will place extra strain on cost-sensitive consumers in Asia and Africa hit by higher fuel and food prices.
Impact on Indian consumers
With the Ukraine war, the sunflower and soybean oil is already under pressure as imports have halved but the situation was managed with other variants of oils. But, the Indonesian oil ban will have a "devastating effect" unless sorted out quickly, an edible oil refiner official said.
The last Indian Economic Survey had blamed rising price of oil and fats and it was a major driver of inflation in the foods and beverages category in the fiscal FY'22 Oil and fats contributed to around 60 per cent of food and beverages inflation in the country, despite having a weight of only 7.8 per cent in the basket.
Inflation both at the retail and wholesale levels for edible oil had begun in Q4FY19-20 and still continues. The Wholesale Price Index or WPI -based inflation already surged to 14.55 per cent in March 2022, after a 13.11 per cent reading in February 2022.
Edible oils such as palm oil are a key raw material for FMCG and HoReCa (hotels, restaurants and caterers) industries and a rise in the prices of these commodities impacts consumer goods beyond food products such as soaps, shampoos, etc.

ARTICLE 177
TITLE: Oil’s Not Well With Palm And Sunflower As Indonesia’s Export Curbs Sets Off Alarm Bells Over Price Hikes, Inflation
URL: https://swarajyamag.com/news-brief/oils-not-well-with-palm-and-sunflower-as-indonesias-export-curbs-sets-off-alarm-bells-over-price-hikes-inflation

India may be staring at a possible sharp elevation in edible oil prices in India with Indonesia, world’s largest producer of palm oil, planning an export ban on palm oil which alongwith its derivative products are used to manufacture several daily consumption goods such as soaps, margarine, shampoos, noodles, biscuits and chocolates.
Indonesia announced shipment halts on crude palm oil will start from 28 April and last until the government deems a domestic shortage resolved.
Though there has been a reported roll-back of the export curbs, which will be restricted to shipments of refined, bleached and deodorised (RBD) palm olein, in the absence of any official word on this, there is still apprehension that a sudden stop in monthly supplies of around 300,000-325,000 tonnes of palm oil will escalate edible oil prices in India which have been already on the boil due to the ongoing Ukrainian crisis.
India imports around 13-13.5 million tonnes of edible oils, of which around 8-8.5 million tonnes (around 63 per cent) is palm oil. Almost 70 per cent of the total annual palm oil imported into India is in the crude form, while the rest is refined.
With imports of nearly 60 per cent of its edible oil requirement, India remains extremely vulnerable to adverse developments in global trade as well as oilseed production and regulatory changes in key import centres. Hence India would be amongst the worst affected countries as it is the world’s largest palm oil importer, which depends heavily on Indonesia and Malaysia.
The country's total vegetable oil imports rose 16 per cent to 12.70 lakh tonnes in January, compared to 10.96 lakh tonnes in the year. Palm oil is a relatively cheaper oil among the other edible oils. According to a Crisil research, palm oil is the most consumed edible oil in India, with a 40 per cent share in the country’s edible oil consumption basket and refined sunflower oil constitutes 10 per cent of India’s consumption of 230-240 lakh tonne of edible oils (all types) annually.
The cascading effect of the rise in palm oil prices will be seen in further price increase in other edible oils such as soyabean oil, sunflower oil etc., fanning food inflation in India.
“Indonesia’s ban of palm oil exports can push up edible oil prices,” agrees Amnish Aggarwal, Director - Research at Prabhudas Lilladher. “The ban comes as another blow after the surge in oils due to the Ukraine-Russia war.
Palm oil is a key ingredient in major food processing industries and Fast Moving Consumer Good (FMGC) staples majors such as Britannia, Hindustan Unilever, Nestle India and ITC would be amongst the key companies affected directly as a result of the ban and higher prices,” says Aggarwal who believes the maximum impact in categories such as biscuits, noodles, cakes, potato chips, frozen desserts etc.
We light sparks. What you just read is one of them.
Every story at Swarajya begins the same way: someone notices something that isn't quite right, or something that's working quietly in the background that nobody's talking about. We go find that story, speak to the people who know it from the inside, and write it up in a way that makes it impossible to ignore.
We do this because we believe a country cannot fix what it cannot see clearly. And India is at a moment where seeing clearly matters more than it ever has.
This is what your subscription funds. Not just access to articles — the work itself. The phone calls, the research, the writers who care enough to get it right. If what you just read made you think, even a little, that's a spark. And sparks, when enough of them gather, ignite something much larger.
Join us. Lets keep the sparks coming.

ARTICLE 178
TITLE: Indonesian U-turn: Export ban will cover crude palm oil
URL: https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/economy/agri-business/indonesian-u-turn-export-ban-will-cover-crude-palm-oil/article65360776.ece

In its latest policy flip-flop, Indonesia on Wednesday said it will expand its ban on export of palm oil to crude oil palm, setting off the palm oil market virtually afire.
The announcement coming around noon in Jakarta time from the country’s Coordinating Minister for Economic Affairs, Airlangga Hartarto, saw crude palm oil July contracts soaring by 10 per cent past 7,000 Malaysian ringgits to 7,001 a tonne (₹1.23 lakh) on Bursa Malaysia Derivatives. This is the highest level the edible oil has increased to after March 9.
In a briefing, Hartarto, said the ban on the export of palm oil will include crude palm oil, RBD palm oil and used cooking oil. The ban will come into effect from Thursday (April 28) and will last until domestic cooking oil prices ease, which some Indian buyers see as short-term.
‘Short-term affair’
“We don’t estimate this ban to be long-term. Therefore, the market will witness a correction. But May looks very bullish. The premium of soya and sunflower refined oil over palm oil will narrow down. The overall price outlook is strong till August-September; that is, till next crop arrives in the market,” said Sougata Niyogi, CEO – Oil Palm, Godrej Agrovet Limited.
BV Mehta, Executive Director of Solvent Extractors’ Association of India (SEA), told BusinessLine that Indonesia has sent shivers to the whole world. Now the prices of edible oils are set to go up drastically because of this move. India has to live with high prices of edible oil, and the government will have a tough time now.
With the Indian Government having implemented various measures, from lowering import duty to impressing producers to cut down their margins, options to tackle the situation could be limited.
However, industry sources said processors had stocks that could last them till May-end. India is also reported to be in touch with Indonesia on developments with regards to crude palm oil.
April 25 clarification
On April 22, Indonesian President Joko Widodo announced the suspension of all cooking oil and raw material exports from April 28 until further orders. However, on April 25, it clarified that its export ban, which was to come into force from April 28, will not cover palm oil..
This provided relief to importing nations such as India that depend on imports of edible oils to meet their domestic demand.
Mehta said Indonesia is holding around 5 million tonnes (mt) of stocks of palm oil. In addition, it produces around 4 mt additional oil every month. “It could have suspended its biodiesel programme for the time being,” he said.
The SEA Executive Director said the price of palm oil, which was around $500 a tonne two years ago, has gone up to $1,800 a tonne now. This is an increase of over three times in a matter of two years.
According to SEA data, CPO import from Indonesia to India was 5.01 lakh tonnes (lt) during November-March of the current oil year as against 12.95 lt in the corresponding period a year ago. Import of RBD palmolein from Indonesia to India increased to 4.72 lt during the period against 4,900 tonnes a year-ago.
Prices on the rise
Edible oil prices have been consistently rising over the past year with the Russia-Ukraine war further complicating the scenario. Ukraine and Russia are the major producers of sunflower oil in the world. The war between them has affected the supply of sunflower oil to the global market.
On the other hand, soyabean production was affected due to weather factor in South America.
Niyogi said the current conditions will keep oilseed farmers’ morale high and fuel rapid area expansion across major oil-producing States.
Published on April 27, 2022

ARTICLE 179
TITLE: Indonesia ban on crude, RBD palm oil ‘temporary’
URL: https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/economy/agri-business/indonesia-ban-on-crude-rbd-palm-oil-temporary/article65363550.ece

Indonesia has imposed a “temporary export ban” on crude palm oil (CPO), red palm oil (CPO), palm oil mill effluent (POME), refined bleached deodorized (RBD) palm oil and used cooking oil, an order issued by the Cabinet Secretariat in Jakarta said.
‘Baffling’
The ban came into effect from Thursday with traders in Singapore dubbing the move as ‘baffling.’
The order says the government will also impose strict punishment for export ban violations. “This temporary export ban is (part) of the government’s commitment to give priority to the communities. Thus, any violations will be strictly penalised. Once again, the government will impose strict punishment against those who violate the export ban,” said Airlangga Hartarto, Coordinating Minister for Economic Affairs.
Domestic prices target
According to Airlangga, the Ministry of trade regulates export ban on CPO and its derivative products in order to avoid misinterpretation of the policy. He further said the implementation of the export ban will continue until the bulk cooking oil price reaches 14,000 Indonesian rupiah (approximately ₹74) per litre in all regions across Indonesia.
The export ban also aims to ensure that CPO products can be prioritised to ensure availability of bulk cooking oil at 14,000 rupiah per litre at traditional markets and micro, small-sized enterprises.
For the record, the government has imposed a policy on bulk cooking oil. However, the policy is deemed ineffective as bulk cooking oil is still sold at a price above 14,000 rupiah per litre in several regions. The Ministry of Finance’s Directorate General of Customs and Excise and the Indonesian National Police’s Food Task Force will monitor implementation of this policy strictly and continuously, including during the Eid al-Fitr holiday.
“Implementation of the export ban will be monitored continuously. Every violation will be strictly penalised in accordance with the law and regulations. And if it is necessary, the policy will be adjusted to suit the prevailing situation,” Airlangga remarked.
Indian consignments held up
Furthermore, in a bid to accelerate the distribution of bulk cooking oil to the communities, the government has sped up price subsidy payment through the Oil Palm Plantation Fund Management Agency without compromising on good governance.
The Indonesian Government has also assigned the State Logistics Agency (Bulog) to distribute bulk cooking oil to the communities, especially in traditional markets.
Meanwhile, Reuters reported that 2.9 lakh tonnes of palm group of oils headed for Indian ports have got stuck due to the Indonesian ban.
Crude palm oil futures for July on Bursa Malaysia Derivatives gained a tad on the announcement to close at 6,926 Malaysian ringgits (₹1,21,680) a tonne. Prices, however, were lower than the previous day’s close.
Published on April 28, 2022

ARTICLE 180
TITLE: What forced Indonesia’s flip-flop on crude palm oil export ban
URL: https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/economy/agri-business/what-forced-indonesias-flip-flop-on-crude-palm-oil-export-ban/article65362703.ece

Indonesia’s flip-flop on export of crude palm oil, RBD (refined, bleached and deodoursied) palm oil, and palmolein effective today appears to be tied to the necessity to tame food prices as the country prepares to enter post-Eid period of plentiful consumption.
There is still speculation, if the export ban has been slapped on all forms of palm oil, it will be temporary. A ban on crude palm oil (CPO) or RBD palm oil will have serious consequences at the production and consumption ends, traders based in Singapore fear.
More damaging could be Indonesia’s reputation as a “sensible” player in international business will be replaced by the sentiment that its leaders are capable of capricious decision-making.
Catching trade by surprise
As of Thursday morning, no official orders had been issued. If anything dramatic were to happen, it would be between Thursday and Fridy. Everyone in the trade and industry is waiting to see how the ban goes.
On Wednesday, Indonesia caught the global trade by surprise with its latest flip-flop on export ban saying it would cover crude palm oil. This came as a surprise to the market and Bursia Malaysia Derivatives greeted the decision with a 10 per cent rise in crude palm oil contracts for July above 7,000 Malaysian ringgit. On Thursday, the contracts had slipped to 6,893 a tonne ($1,579.88) at noon.
The decision of including crude palm oil (CPO) in the export ban list came within 48 hours of Jakarta telling the global commodity that CPO will not be banned. The crude palm oil market has been swinging wildly ever since Indonesia President Joko Widodo announced his government’s decision to ban palm oil exports to tackle shortage in the domestic market and surging prices of edible oils.
Widodo remarks, Jakarta’s u-turn
Another trading source recounted how last Friday Widodo made some public remark about banning exports and over the weekend, the market rallied. Come Monday, there was a clarification issued to the effect that any potential ban on exports will apply to olein. No mention of crude palm oil or RBD palm oil was made then.
Traders say palm oil exports from Indonesia have continued and prices have remained high on account of global political uncertainty, structural weaknesses in many large economies, supply chain dislocation, the war and the opening of human societies post-Covid. In Indonesia, certain parts have rationed access to palm oil. All this are causing widespread consternation.
Globally, edible oils have been surging as oilseeds production was affected by labour shortage in palm oil plantation in South-East Asia and weather impacting soyabean in South America. The Ukraine war has complicated the issue further, with sunflower oil exports from Kremlin and Kyiv coming to a halt.
Doesn’t want pitched battles
Traders say the Indonesian President does not want pitched battles with political opponents nor the extremist elements within the society. The wholesale ban of palm oil, however, does not make sense as it fetches $3-4 billion revenue every month to Jakarta. The revenue comes from from export taxes and duties.
Besides, palm oil is a large employer of the most disadvantaged sections of the community. If the export door is shut, there will be oversupply within no time, resulting in local prices collapsing and withdrawal of capacities. From all angles, it would be a lose-lose-lose choice for the government. The next election is due in February 2024 and probably, Widodo could time his actions better, traders say.
Indian dilemma
For India, the problem is imported inflation with crude and cooking oils contributing in a large measure. Though the Centre has taken various measures to minimise the impact of the surge in edible oils with duty cuts and controlling processors’ prices, it seems to be at its wit’s end with the latest development catching it by surprise.
According to the Consumer Affairs Ministry, packaged palm oil prices have increased by 20.15 per cent as of April 27 to ₹155.57 a kg at the retail level - the highest rise among cooking oils year-on-year. Sunflower oil prices have gained 15.8 per cent at ₹189.1, while mustard oil at ₹184.10 has gone up by 13.82 per cent. Groundnut oil has seen a 7.08 per cent rise to ₹185.82 and soyabean has surged by 18.44 per cent to ₹166.52 a kg.
The industry, however, says they have inventories that can last until May and by that time, Indonesia may lift the ban.
Published on April 28, 2022

ARTICLE 181
TITLE: India s Edible Oil Position Comfortable Amid Indonesian Ban Centre
URL: https://www.businessworld.in/article/India-s-Edible-Oil-Position-Comfortable-Amid-Indonesian-Ban-Centre-/02-05-2022-427268

Former Uttar Pradesh Chief Secretary and author Alok Ranjan argues that India’s development journey must move beyond economic output to focus on happiness, quality of life, education, healthcare and inclusive growth
India's big securities fraud charge was built by comparing a gold refinery's gross sales turnover to its processing margin alone — and SEBI's own order contains the table that makes the question unavoidable. Then comes the ex-parte action after 20 months of open investigation, a forensic audit conducted on 2% of the evidence, and directions so mild they barely register the severity of the charge.
SEBI's own document defeats SEBI. The regulator has advanced India's largest securities allegation while its own order cannot specify what, exactly, it is charging.
Meta will acquire about a 20 per cent minority stake in CRED and Shah will step down from his operating role as chief executive officer of CRED and join Meta’s global leadership team
The index of eight core industries (ICI) increased by 0.5 per cent in May 2026, as compared to a final growth rate of 1.8 per cent in April 2026
The Union Budget 2026–27 allocated Rs 1,000 crore toward India Semiconductor Mission (ISM) 2.0, while the government has already approved 10 ISM projects worth Rs 1.60 lakh crore across six states. India’s semiconductor market is also projected to reach $100–110 billion by 2030, underlining the scale of the opportunity ahead
Former Uttar Pradesh Chief Secretary and author Alok Ranjan argues that India’s development journey must move beyond economic output to focus on happiness, quality of life, education, healthcare and inclusive growth
India's big securities fraud charge was built by comparing a gold refinery's gross sales turnover to its processing margin alone — and SEBI's own order contains the table that makes the question unavoidable. Then comes the ex-parte action after 20 months of open investigation, a forensic audit conducted on 2% of the evidence, and directions so mild they barely register the severity of the charge.
SEBI's own document defeats SEBI. The regulator has advanced India's largest securities allegation while its own order cannot specify what, exactly, it is charging.
Meta will acquire about a 20 per cent minority stake in CRED and Shah will step down from his operating role as chief executive officer of CRED and join Meta’s global leadership team
The index of eight core industries (ICI) increased by 0.5 per cent in May 2026, as compared to a final growth rate of 1.8 per cent in April 2026
The Union Budget 2026–27 allocated Rs 1,000 crore toward India Semiconductor Mission (ISM) 2.0, while the government has already approved 10 ISM projects worth Rs 1.60 lakh crore across six states. India’s semiconductor market is also projected to reach $100–110 billion by 2030, underlining the scale of the opportunity ahead
Former Uttar Pradesh Chief Secretary and author Alok Ranjan argues that India’s development journey must move beyond economic output to focus on happiness, quality of life, education, healthcare and inclusive growth
India's big securities fraud charge was built by comparing a gold refinery's gross sales turnover to its processing margin alone — and SEBI's own order contains the table that makes the question unavoidable. Then comes the ex-parte action after 20 months of open investigation, a forensic audit conducted on 2% of the evidence, and directions so mild they barely register the severity of the charge.
SEBI's own document defeats SEBI. The regulator has advanced India's largest securities allegation while its own order cannot specify what, exactly, it is charging.
Former Uttar Pradesh Chief Secretary and author Alok Ranjan argues that India’s development journey must move beyond economic output to focus on happiness, quality of life, education, healthcare and inclusive growth
Raj Thackeray Entered The Kohinoor Deal When The Money Came In. He Left Before It Burned And Losses Came In. ED questioned him for 8.5 hours. Maharashtra Is Still Waiting For An Explanation. Raj Thackeray's Kohinoor story remains one of Maharashtra’s least examined financial mysteries.
Subscribe to our newsletter to get updates on our latest news
Subscribe to our newsletter to get updates on our latest news

ARTICLE 182
TITLE: ‘Indonesia may lift ban on crude, RBD palm oil export by month-end’
URL: https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/economy/agri-business/indonesia-may-lift-ban-on-crude-rbd-palm-oil-export-by-month-end/article65403325.ece

The Solvent Extractors’ Association of India (SEA) hopes that Indonesia would likely lift the ban on export of crude and RBD (refined, bleached, deodorised) palm oil by the end of this month.
During a presentation on India’s ability to meet its edible oil requirement, at the Globoil International 2022 organised in Dubai by Tefla’s under the patronage of SEA, BV Mehta, Executive Director of SEA, said Indonesia was expected to lift the ban before the end of May. The situation will turn ugly if Indonesia extends the ban on export of palm products as there is not enough supply from other origins, he said.
India imports about 6.5 lakh tonnes (lt) of palm oil a month from Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand and other countries. Indonesia and Malaysia supply around 3 lt each..
Mehta said India has raised its concerns at the World Trade Organisation (WTO) over a host of trade barriers built by Indonesia, including export restrictions on palm oil and import curbs on bovine meat and automotive parts, as these have adversely impacted India.
Edible oil import
He said India imported 6.54 million tonnes (mt) of edible oils in the first six months of the oil year 2021-22 (November to April), up by 4.3 per cent from the previous year.
He said that imports are likely to remain in the range of 12.5-13 mt during the current oil year 2021-22 due to factors such as record harvest of rapeseed/ mustard, improved availability of domestic oils, fall in demand due to high prices and the normal monsoon forecast.
On the impact of the Russia-Ukraine war on sunflower oil, he said India imported around 1.12 mt of sunflower oil mainly from Ukraine, Russia and Argentina during the first six months of the oil year 2021-22. Only 57,000 tonnes was imported in April. There has been no shipment from Ukraine since March 27.
He said high prices of sunflower oil in the international market, reduced availability, and high domestic prices have shrunk its consumption in India. The shortfall is partially offset by other edible oils such as palmolein, soyabean oil, groundnut oil and rice bran oil.
Way forward
To reduce dependence on imports, India must step up oilseeds production from 30 mt to 45 mt by 2025-26, and 60 mt by 2030-31, Mehta said. This will help cut imports from 65 per cent to 10-15 per cent in the next 10 years.
The Government should provide thrust to the National Mission on Oilseeds with adequate funding. High oil-bearing seeds such as mustard, groundnut and sunflower can be the game changer in this regard.
He suggested growing groundnut as an intercrop with castor and other crops. Crop diversification in Punjab and Haryana, from wheat to mustard, will ease the edible oil shortage to some extent.
With these steps, India can produce 18-19 mt of edible oils by 2026, he said.
-
More Like This
Published on May 11, 2022

ARTICLE 183
TITLE: Indonesian farmers protest against rising cost of palm oil export ban
URL: https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/economy/agri-business/indonesian-farmers-protest-against-rising-cost-of-palm-oil-export-ban/article65424063.ece

Hundreds of Indonesian smallholder farmers on Tuesday staged a protest in the capital Jakarta and in other parts of the world's fourth most populous country, demanding the government end a palm oil export ban that has slashed their income.
Indonesia, the world's top palm oil exporter, on April 28 halted shipments of crude palm oil and some of its derivative products to control soaring prices of domestic cooking oil, rattling global vegetable oil markets.
However, government efforts to make cooking oil, a household staple for many Indonesian dishes, more affordable have failed, undermining the approval rating of President Joko Widodo and prompting the farmers' backlash.
"Malaysian farmers are wearing full smiles, Indonesian farmers suffer," one of the signs held up by protesters read. Malaysia is the second-largest producer of palm oil and aims to fill the market gap opened by Indonesia's export ban.
Marching next to a truck filled with palm oil fruit, farmers held a rally outside the offices of the Coordinating Ministry of Economic Affairs, which is leading the government policy.
Prices plummet
In a statement, the smallholder farmers' group APKASINDO said since the export ban the price of palm fruit had dropped 70% below a floor price set by regional authorities.
Independent farmers are not protected by the floor price, which is fixed through an agreement between mills and large-scale cooperatives.
APKASINDO estimates at least 25% of palm oil mills have stopped buying palm fruit from independent farmers since the ban started. This indicates that storage tanks are filling up at mills, said Albertus Wawan, a farmer from West Kalimantan province, by telephone.
Similar protests by farmers were also planned in 22 other provinces, APKASINDO said.
Yuslan Thamrin, a farmer attending the Jakarta rally, said celebrations in his area of Aceh province in Sumatra for the end of Ramadan this month were more muted because of the lost income from the export ban.
"With such poor prices, farmers are hesitating to even harvest," he said, adding that mills were also not taking in more fruit because storage at ports was full.
Jokowi’s approval drops
Another farmer pointed to the dilemma palm oil smallholders face.
"Harvesting the fruit is not profitable, but leaving it rotting would damage the trees," Bambang Gianto, a farmer in South Sumatra, said by telephone.
Representatives of the farmers had met some government officials to convey their demands, economic ministry official Susiwijono Moegiarso said.
President Widodo imposed the export ban on palm oil after earlier policies failed to control domestic cooking oil prices.
Jokowi, as the president is popularly known, said the need for affordable food trumped revenue concerns and the ban would be lifted only after domestic needs were met.
But an opinion poll this week showed his approval rating sagged to 58.1% in May, the lowest since December 2015, largely tied to the rising cost of cooking oil.
Yose Rizal Damuri, an executive director at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, said the type of price control policies Indonesia was trying to implement were flawed.
"This is a policy that was taken just to show that the president is doing something," he said, urging authorities to allow the price to track the market and compensate consumers through other means.
Chief Economics Minister Airlangga Hartarto has said the ban would stay in place until bulk cooking oil prices drop to 14,000 rupiah ($0.9563) per litre across Indonesia.
Trade Ministry data showed as of Friday that bulk cooking oil averaged 17,300 rupiah per litre, down from an average of 18,000 rupiah in March but up from 13,300 in July.
(Additional reporting by Willy Kurniawan, Johan Purnomo, Stanley Widianto; Writing by Fransiska Nangoy; editing by Ed Davies and Christian Schmollinger)
Published on May 17, 2022

ARTICLE 184
TITLE: Indonesia To Lift Palm Oil Export Ban From Monday
URL: https://www.businessworld.in/article/Indonesia-To-Lift-Palm-Oil-Export-Ban-From-Monday-/19-05-2022-429479

Former Uttar Pradesh Chief Secretary and author Alok Ranjan argues that India’s development journey must move beyond economic output to focus on happiness, quality of life, education, healthcare and inclusive growth
India's big securities fraud charge was built by comparing a gold refinery's gross sales turnover to its processing margin alone — and SEBI's own order contains the table that makes the question unavoidable. Then comes the ex-parte action after 20 months of open investigation, a forensic audit conducted on 2% of the evidence, and directions so mild they barely register the severity of the charge.
SEBI's own document defeats SEBI. The regulator has advanced India's largest securities allegation while its own order cannot specify what, exactly, it is charging.
Meta will acquire about a 20 per cent minority stake in CRED and Shah will step down from his operating role as chief executive officer of CRED and join Meta’s global leadership team
The index of eight core industries (ICI) increased by 0.5 per cent in May 2026, as compared to a final growth rate of 1.8 per cent in April 2026
The Union Budget 2026–27 allocated Rs 1,000 crore toward India Semiconductor Mission (ISM) 2.0, while the government has already approved 10 ISM projects worth Rs 1.60 lakh crore across six states. India’s semiconductor market is also projected to reach $100–110 billion by 2030, underlining the scale of the opportunity ahead
Former Uttar Pradesh Chief Secretary and author Alok Ranjan argues that India’s development journey must move beyond economic output to focus on happiness, quality of life, education, healthcare and inclusive growth
India's big securities fraud charge was built by comparing a gold refinery's gross sales turnover to its processing margin alone — and SEBI's own order contains the table that makes the question unavoidable. Then comes the ex-parte action after 20 months of open investigation, a forensic audit conducted on 2% of the evidence, and directions so mild they barely register the severity of the charge.
SEBI's own document defeats SEBI. The regulator has advanced India's largest securities allegation while its own order cannot specify what, exactly, it is charging.
Meta will acquire about a 20 per cent minority stake in CRED and Shah will step down from his operating role as chief executive officer of CRED and join Meta’s global leadership team
The index of eight core industries (ICI) increased by 0.5 per cent in May 2026, as compared to a final growth rate of 1.8 per cent in April 2026
The Union Budget 2026–27 allocated Rs 1,000 crore toward India Semiconductor Mission (ISM) 2.0, while the government has already approved 10 ISM projects worth Rs 1.60 lakh crore across six states. India’s semiconductor market is also projected to reach $100–110 billion by 2030, underlining the scale of the opportunity ahead
Former Uttar Pradesh Chief Secretary and author Alok Ranjan argues that India’s development journey must move beyond economic output to focus on happiness, quality of life, education, healthcare and inclusive growth
India's big securities fraud charge was built by comparing a gold refinery's gross sales turnover to its processing margin alone — and SEBI's own order contains the table that makes the question unavoidable. Then comes the ex-parte action after 20 months of open investigation, a forensic audit conducted on 2% of the evidence, and directions so mild they barely register the severity of the charge.
SEBI's own document defeats SEBI. The regulator has advanced India's largest securities allegation while its own order cannot specify what, exactly, it is charging.
Former Uttar Pradesh Chief Secretary and author Alok Ranjan argues that India’s development journey must move beyond economic output to focus on happiness, quality of life, education, healthcare and inclusive growth
Raj Thackeray Entered The Kohinoor Deal When The Money Came In. He Left Before It Burned And Losses Came In. ED questioned him for 8.5 hours. Maharashtra Is Still Waiting For An Explanation. Raj Thackeray's Kohinoor story remains one of Maharashtra’s least examined financial mysteries.
Subscribe to our newsletter to get updates on our latest news
Subscribe to our newsletter to get updates on our latest news

ARTICLE 185
TITLE: Indonesia to lift ban on palm oil exports from May 23
URL: https://www.freepressjournal.in/business/indonesia-to-lift-ban-on-palm-oil-exports-from-may-23

Indonesia will lift its ban on palm oil exports next week, President Joko Widodo said Thursday, relieving pressure on the global vegetable oil market that hit peak prices because of the suspension, the war in Ukraine and global warming, AFP reported.
"Based on the supply and the condition of cooking oil and considering there are 17 million people in the palm oil industry; farmers and other supporting workers, I decided that cooking oil export will reopen on Monday, May 23," he told an online briefing.
President Joko Widodo announced the ban from April 28 to help lower soaring domestic prices. Indonesia halted shipments of crude palm oil and some of its derivative products in a bid to control soaring prices of domestic cooking oil, Reuters said. Palm oil is used in edibles, cosmetics, toiletries and cleaning products.
Indonesia imposed a ban on palm oil exports
Some reports indicated that the ban did not apply to crude palm oil (CPO) but on refined bleached deodorized palmolein, but the government widened the scope a couple of days later to also include CPO.
Palm oil is preferred in India by the food industry as it is relatively cheaper, lasts longer, and is more stable at high temperatures than other oils.
CPO is used by most food companies, while soap makers in India use a derivative Palm Fatty Acid Distillate (PFAD), a key input for making soaps, soap noodles, etc.
Farmers protest in Jakarta
Hundreds of Indonesian smallholder farmers on Tuesday staged a protest in the capital Jakarta and in other parts of the world's fourth most populous country, demanding the government end a palm oil export ban that has slashed their income, the report said.
Transitory impact on short-term basis: FMCG players
Indian FMCG players, particularly food and snacks manufacturers, were concerned about Indonesia's move to ban exports of crude palm oil, though some of them expect the decision is likely to have only transitory impacts on a short-term basis.
Several industry leaders had then said that they would reduce their reliance on palm oil in phases and shift to alternatives such as rice bran oil and cottonseed oil for food products.
(With inputs from Reuters, Agencies)

ARTICLE 186
TITLE: Indonesia to lift ban on palm oil exports from 23rd May
URL: https://www.newindianexpress.com/world/2022/may/19/indonesia-to-lift-ban-on-palm-oil-exports-from-23rd-may-2455510.html

JAKARTA: Indonesia will lift its ban on palm oil exports next week, President Joko Widodo said Thursday, relieving pressure on the global vegetable oil market after prices spiked because of the suspension and the war in Ukraine.
The archipelago nation issued the ban last month to secure supplies of the commodity, used in a range of goods from chocolate spreads to cosmetics, in the face of a domestic shortage.
"Based on the supply... of cooking oil and considering there are 17 million people in the palm oil industry -- farmers and other supporting workers -- I decided that cooking oil exports will reopen on Monday, May 23. The government will still be monitoring everything strictly to ensure the demand will be met with affordable prices," Widodo told an online briefing.
Authorities had rigorously enforced the export ban, with the Indonesian navy seizing a tanker carrying palm oil out of the country in violation of the order earlier this month. After the ban came into force, Widodo said supplying the country's 270 million people was the "highest priority" of his government.ere are yo.
But Jakarta came under pressure for further saddling prices that were already skyrocketing after Russia's invasion of agricultural powerhouse Ukraine. Palm oil producers staged protests last week in the centre of Jakarta and several towns in Indonesia complaining that the prices for palm oil fruits had dropped dramatically.
The Indonesian leader said he was reversing the suspension because the domestic supply and price of cooking oil had improved since the ban came into effect on April 28.
Widodo said prices had fallen from 19,800 rupiah (USD 1.35) per litre to about 17,200 rupiah (USD 1.17) since the ban. He said that domestic supplies of cooking oil also tripled after the ban from 64,500 tonnes per month to 211,000 tonnes. Industry figures hailed the decision to resume exports.
Eddy Martono, secretary general of the Indonesian Palm Oil Association (GAPKI), said that the organisation "is very grateful to the government, especially to the president" for lifting the ban. "It is a fact that the condition on the ground is very difficult because the tanks have been all full. We hope with the export reopening, the palm oil production can return to normal," he said.
Oil Palm Farmers Association chairman Gulat Manurung thanked Widodo and said oil palm farmers would repay his decision by boosting domestic supplies. "We, oil palm farmers, pledge to help ensure that domestic supplies of cooking oil will be available," he told AFP.
Palm oil is the most widely used vegetable oil in Indonesia and, despite being the world's biggest producer, the country has been facing a cooking oil shortage for months because of poor regulation and producers reluctant to sell at home.
The shortages have in some cases forced consumers to spend hours in queues at distribution centres. Indonesia produces about 60 per cent of the world's palm oil, with one-third consumed by its domestic market. India, China, the European Union and Pakistan are among its major export customers.

ARTICLE 187
TITLE: With storages overflowing, Indonesia to lift palm oil export ban from May 23
URL: https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/economy/agri-business/indonesia-to-lift-palm-oil-export-ban-from-may-23/article65430548.ece

Indonesia will lift the ban on exports of crude palm oil (CPO) and refined, bleached deodorised (RBD) palm oil from May 23, providing much relief to countries such as India from soaring cooking oil prices.
Indonesian President Joko Widodo announced on Thursday to lift the ban after imposing it almost a month ago. It had resulted in CPO futures for July and August dropping by at least 60 Malaysian ringgit (MYR) on Bursa Malaysia Derivatives to 6,303 MYR and 6,074 MYR, respectively.
The Indian edible oil sector welcomed the Indonesian move with Indian Vegetable Oils Producers Association (IVPA) President Sudhakar Desai saying palm oil prices had already dropped by $200 a tonne to $1,750 in anticipation.
Indonesia’s compulsions
Solvent Extractors Association of India Executive Director BV Mehta said palm oil supplies will increase and soften the prices to some extent.
Last week, BusinessLine had reported that Indonesia would have to lift the ban as farmers had stopped production, while the processing units had stopped purchasing fresh fruit bunches (FFB) from growers on overflowing storages.
Abdul Hameed, Director- Sales, Manzoor Trading in Lahore, Pakistan, said the drop in palm oil prices could be limited as Indonesia’s policy on domestic market obligations and taxes were not clear.
Indonesia has lifted the ban despite not achieving its objective of bringing down cooking oil prices to 14,000 rupiah (₹74) a litre. “Domestic prices in Indonesia are still ruling high at 17,000 rupiah (₹90). The Widodo government was worried that high domestic stocks of about 5.7 million tonnes and overflowing storage and port tanks would affect small growers, who harvest 500 kg FFB every day,” Hamid said.
Malaysia gains
The Indonesian government has decided to launch 10,000 discount outlets to sell cooking oil at 14,000 rupiah, he said.
IVPA’s Desai said Indonesia had begun to face internal issues such as farmers’ protests, logistical issues and a lack of storage space. On Tuesday, Indonesian farmers staged a protest demanding the Widodo government to lift export ban.
Hamid said Malaysia had gained from the Indonesian ban with its exports of palm group of oils rising this month. “Malaysia production and end-stocks are expected to lower. It could have pushed up prices, but the Indonesian move will now cool the market,” he said.
SEA’s Mehta said Indonesia supplies 3 lakh tonnes of palm oil every month to India and Malaysia was not able to meet the demand.
Desai said the market’s direction will now depend on demand, especially from China and India. Hamid said Malaysia and Indonesia could factor in increased production costs in palm oil pricing.
War compounds situation
Desai said Indonesia’s export tax on CPO was is $575 a tonne and $408 for refined palm oil. “Considering this, the Centre should increase the Indian duty differential to stop the flooding of refined palm oil to protect the Indian refining industry,” he said.
The Indonesia palm oil export ban compounded the misery of Indian consumers, who were burdened over a year-and-a-half by soaring edible oil prices in view of the Russia-Ukraine war, weather affecting production in South America and palm oil output affected by a labour shortages.
The war, in particular, came as a heavy blow since it has affected sunflower oil supplies from Ukraine, the top exporter, since February 24.
India has responded to the spike in edible oil prices by cutting customs duty to zero and reducing agricultural infrastructure cess, but it has not yielded the desired results.
(With inputs from Rutam Vora, Ahmedabad
Published on May 19, 2022

ARTICLE 188
TITLE: Indonesia’s move to revoke palm oil export ban comes with a rider
URL: https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/economy/agri-business/indonesias-move-to-revoke-palm-oil-export-ban-comes-with-a-rider/article65439370.ece

Indonesia will revoke its ban on exports of crude palm oil (CPO) and refined, bleached, deodorised (RBD) palm oil from May 23 (Monday) as scheduled, but with a rider.
Indonesian Economy Minister Airlangga Hartarto said on Friday that the Joko Widodo government will impose a domestic market obligation (DMO) on palm oil, which requires producers to supply a portion of their production to the local markets.
On Thursday (May 19), while announcing that his government would revoke the ban from May 23, Widodo said his country had ample palm oil supplies to ensure the supply of cooking oil to the domestic consumers.
No clarity yet on DMO
Abdul Hameed, Director-Sales, Manzoor Trading in Lahore, Pakistan, told BusinessLine that Indonesia’s DMO policy will be to ensure that at least 10 million tonnes would be supplied to ensure cooking oil to the country’s vulnerable citizens.
Hameed said Indonesia planned to open at least 10,000 outlets to sell cooking oil at discount. The move follows the Widodo government’s failure to reduce cooking oil prices to 14,000 rupiah (₹74) when it imposed the ban on April 28.
Though Hartarto said the DMO policy would be implemented while revoking the ban, he did not specify the percentage of production that a unit will have to meet under it.
“The trade ministry will determine the size of the DMO that must be met by each producer and the mechanism to produce and distribute cooking oil to the communities,” he said.
Earlier obligations
In addition, Indonesia’s food procurement agency, Bulog, will be asked to build a cooking oil buffer stock, he said.
Earlier, palm oil producers were required to supply 20 per cent of their export volumes as part of DMO. Later, the percentage was increased to 30 per cent.
The announcement on DMO pushed up palm oil prices on Friday by over 0.5 per cent on the Bursa Malaysia Derivatives market. Rates increased by 42 Malaysian ringgits (MYR) for the July contracts to 6,338 MYR and 47 MYR to 6,119 MYR for August contracts.
Palm oil prices increased by nearly four per cent initially soon after the announcement, before finding some stability at the lower level. The rise was in view of the trade considering it as some sort of reversal of Thursday’s announcement revoking the ban.
Helping growers
Hameed said the Indonesian government has also come forward to help oil palm growers by guaranteeing palm fresh fruit bunches (FFB) purchase at good prices.
He said Indonesia’s move had come in the wake of Malaysia making headway in the export market after the ban. He pointed to the latest data from Amspec Group, which showed Malaysian palm oil exports increasing by 30 per cent during May 1-20 to 7,94,527 tonnes against 6,10,728 tonnes during April 1-20.
Indonesia, besides losing its market share due to the ban, also earned the wrath of oil palm growers (who staged a protest on Tuesday against the curbs) and domestic producers.
While the ban failed to achieve its primary objective of bringing down cooking oil prices to 14,000 rupiah, it resulted in farmers not harvesting FFB from their plantations. Domestic oil producers, too, cut their purchases as their storage tanks began to overflow with palm oil.
Relief for India
Besides all this, Indonesia has also lost precious foreign exchange since it accounts for 60 per cent of palm oil supply in the global market. Palm oil makes up 40 per cent of global edible oils.
For India, the revoking of the ban will provide some relief from the skyrocketing inflation and soaring cooking oil prices. India imports about 8.5 million tonnes of palm oil, including RBD palmolein.
Currently, prices are $1,735 C&F Mumbai for RBD palmolein, $1,780 for CPO, $1,830 for degummed soyabean oil and $2,150 for sunflower oil. The all-India average retail price of palm oil is ₹158.06, while soyabean oil is ruling at ₹169.55. Sunflower is ruling at ₹191.89, groundnut at ₹187.1 and mustard oil at ₹185.08.
Palm oil prices are 16 per cent higher year-on-year at retail units, while soyabean oil is up by 14 per cent, sunflower oil by 12 per cent, groundnut oil by six per cent and mustard oil by 7 per cent.
Edible oil prices in India have surged mainly due to lower production of soyabean oil in South America, palm oil output hit by labour shortage in South-East Asia and shortage of sunflower oil supplies due to the Ukraine war.
More Like This
Published on May 20, 2022

ARTICLE 189
TITLE: Palm oil price rallies as Indonesia dilly-dallies on revoking export ban 
URL: https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/economy/agri-business/palm-oil-price-rallies-as-indonesia-dilly-dallies-on-revoking-export-ban/article65466888.ece

Palm oil prices have increased by 4.5 per cent on Bursa Malaysia Derivatives (BMD) Exchange till now since May 19 when Indonesia announced revoking its ban on the export of crude palm oil (CPO) and refined, bleached deodorised (RBD) palm oil as shipments are yet to begin.
Uncertainty grips the palm oil market over the domestic market obligations (DMO) that Indonesia said it will impose to allow palm oil exports. The trade is waiting for a clear picture, said traders and analysts.
A Reuters report earlier this week said Indonesia will remove subsidy on bulk cooking oil after May 31 and replace it with domestic price obligation on its raw materials.
Plans ready
According to Abdul Hameed, Director (Sales), Manzoor Trading in Lahore, Pakistan, the Indonesian government is ready to allow one million tonnes (mt) of palm oil for companies that had earlier entered into an agreement with the government through an online portal (SIMIRAH).
This time, they could be allowed to ship palm oil provided they meet the domestic obligation by supplying one tonne for every three or five tonnes export permit they seek.
In view of this uncertainty, crude palm oil August contracts on BMD closed at 6,351 Malaysian ringgits on Friday ($1,450.33) a tonne against 6,094 MYR ($1,391.64) on May 19 when Indonesia announced revoking the export ban.
Mistry’s plea
Indonesia’s dilly-dallying on allowing palm oil exports led to global edible oil expert and Godrej International Ltd Director Dorab Mistry writing an open letter on Thursday to immediately resume palm oil exports.
He said allowing palm oil exports was a must to save Indonesian smallholder farmers who were facing a calamity. Record stocks, full storage tanks with producers, the boom cycle in production, poor demand and export curbs spell almost “certain doom” for the Indonesian farmer, the Godrej International director said.
“Indonesia’s policy is still a puzzle for traders and they are waiting for more clarity. The DMO could be hard for corporates to meet and complicated too,” said Hameed.
Malaysia’s rising exports
Palm oil prices were ruling high due to tight supply, rising demand and low production, particularly in Malaysia. “Reports of Shanghai opening up after the lockdown to tackle Covid have also lifted the market as China’s palm oil stocks are at five-year low,” the Lahore-based firm’s official said.
After dropping 1.5 per cent on Wednesday, the market increased on Thursday following Malaysian export data before paring part of its gains on Friday. According to SGS, Malaysia palm oil exports were up nearly 24 per cent at 1.11 mt during May 1-25 compared with 0.89 during the same period a month ago. Another surveyor, Amspec, pegged 22.54 per cent higher exports, while ITS estimated shipments were higher by almost 25 per cent.
India’s duty-free move
However, palm oil is coming under pressure from India’s decision to allow duty- and cess-free imports of 2 mt of crude soyabean and sunflower oils each annually this fiscal and next.
Analysts said some buyers were exiting palm oil contracts to purchase competing edible oils such as soyabean and sunflower. According to the Solvent Extractors Association of India (SEA), the landed price of CPO currently is $1,765 a tonne, while RBD palmoleing’s cost is $1,800. Sunflower oil’s costs $2,100 and degummed soyabean oil $1,836.
Traders said after India decided to allow imports of soyabean and sunflower oils duty-free on Tuesday, Argentina’s soyabean oil witnessed some hectic selling. On Wednesday, at least 25,000 tonnes of soyabean oil had changed hands for loading in June.
Hameed said the current year will be bullish for edible oil, particularly due to shortage of funds and dry weather in Latin America besides the Russia-Ukraine war.
“I think palm oil prices will rule between 6,000 and 7,000 MYR, though India’s duty-free decision will hurt the commodity. Uncertainty will continue in the market over the next 1-2 months,” he said.
More Like This
Published on May 27, 2022

ARTICLE 190
TITLE: Palm oil imports surge to seven-month high in May despite Indonesia's ban
URL: https://www.thehindu.com/business/Economy/indian-palm-oil-imports-surge-in-may-despite-indonesia-ban/article65502961.ece

Palm oil exports in May were their highest in seven months and up 15% in April as the country overcame curbs on Indonesian exports by sourcing more of the commodity from Malaysia, Thailand and Papua New Guinea, according to five industry officials.
Higher purchases by India, the world's biggest importer of vegetable oil, could support Malaysian palm oil prices, which are trading near a record high.
The country imported 660,000 tonnes of palm oil in May, up from 572,508 tonnes in April, according to the average estimate from five dealers.
Imports from Indonesia fell in May, but refiners managed to buy more from Malaysia, Thailand, and Papua New Guinea, said Sandeep Bajoria, chief executive of Sunvin Group, a vegetable oil brokerage and consultancy.
Indonesia, the world's biggest producer and exporter of palm oil, on April 28 halted exports of the product to control soaring prices at home. Jakarta allowed exports to resume from May 23 but put in place policies to safeguard domestic supplies.
The Solvent Extractors' Association of India, a trade body based in Mumbai, is likely to publish May's import figure in mid-June.
Meanwhile, soyoil imports in May rose to 352,614 tonnes from 315,853 tonnes in April, said a senior government official. It could rise sharply in the coming months, because New Delhi has allowed duty-free imports of 2 million tonnes of the commodity, according to a Mumbai-based dealer with a global trading firm.
Sunflower oil imports also jumped to 123,970 tonnes in May from 67,788 tonnes a month earlier, the government official said.
India buys soyoil mainly from Argentina and Brazil and sunflower oil from Ukraine and Russia.
"As sunoil shipments from Ukraine have stopped, India is trying to import more from Russia," the dealer said.
Published - June 07, 2022 12:19 pm IST

ARTICLE 191
TITLE: Ban on palm oil import through Kerala ports bleeds consumers       
URL: https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/kerala/ban-on-palm-oil-import-through-kerala-ports-bleeds-consumers/article65504468.ece

The ban on import of palm oil through Kerala ports, introduced to lift the sagging fortunes of coconut growers, it seems, could not do anything to raise the market potential of coconut oil as imported palm oil through neighbouring ports reach Kerala by road costing an extra ₹3 per/kg for an average customer.
The retail prices of coconut oil and palm oil are almost equal now in the State. Further, consumers have to pay an additional charge for palm oil as it is unloaded in ports in the neighbouring States and brought to refineries in Kerala by road.
“Palm oil accounts for around 50% of the total domestic oil consumption in Kerala, which will come roughly around 20,000 tonne per month. We used to import crude palm oil through the Mangaluru port and bring it to the refinery in Kozhikode by road. It has led to an additional charge of ₹3 per kg of palm oil being sold in Kerala. Besides, Kerala ports are losing substantial business,” says Mohammed Ali, MD of Parisons Oil Group.
Though the ban has been imposed to protect the interest of coconut farmers in Kerala, it does not have any noticeable results, says Munshid Ali, secretary, Kerala Exporters Forum.
If the State government wants to protect the interests of coconut growers, it should extend more support to the farmers. Banning palm oil through Kerala ports will not do anything good for them. Further, coconut oil is now brought from neighbouring States to meet the demand in Kerala, says Mr Ali.
The pandemic had dealt a blow to the tender coconut industry in Tamil Nadu and Karnataka in the past two years and now oil extracted from matured nuts is flooding Kerala market.
The import stats of palm oil through the neighbouring ports also reveal the growing popularity of palm oil in local markets. The import of palm oil through the neighbouring ports of Mangaluru, Chennai, and Tuticorin has seen an average increase of 2-4 lakh tonne before COVID-19 and an average of 2 lakh tonne after COVID-19 compared to the imports before the ban.
Now, the Kerala Exporters Forum has given a representation to Minister for Commerce Piyush Goyal requesting to lift the restrictions imposed on the import of palm oil through the ports in Kerala.
Published - June 07, 2022 09:22 pm IST

ARTICLE 192
TITLE: Sonkatch: Five arrested for Rs 60L edible oil theft
URL: https://www.freepressjournal.in/indore/sonkatch-five-arrested-for-rs-60l-edible-oil-theft

Sonkatch (Madhya Pradesh): Sonkatch police in Dewas district arrested five accused with edible oil worth Rs 60 lakh stolen on July 9.
The police informed that on July 9, complainant Arjun Panwar, 36, a resident of Khajuria Kanka locality of Sonkatch lodged a missing complaint of his consignments. The complainant had told the police that he had left for Sagar after loading a truckload of oil from a soya company based in Dewas.
They parked the truck near the petrol pump in Sonkatch on July 8 and went home for the night. The next day on July 9, at around 9.30 am, when he came to see his truck, the truck was missing from there.
There were 550 cans of oil and 125 boxes in the truck, which had been stolen. The theft was reported by the complainant to the police station.
On the basis of the report, the police formed a team and caught five accused based on the information given by the informer.
Police said that the accused were trying to sell the oil cans.
Those who were arrested include, Mahendra Rathore, 20, Khedakhjuria Sonkatch, AjayPanwar, 21, Sandeep Chauhan, Narendra, Rahul Kushwaha, 23, all residents of Bhawani Nagar, Banganga, Indore. Police said that the key accused Mahendra Rathore already has a criminal record.

ARTICLE 193
TITLE: Pollachi MP seeks ban on import of coconut oil till copra rates increases
URL: https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Coimbatore/pollachi-mp-seeks-ban-on-import-of-coconut-oil-till-copra-rates-increases/article66254981.ece

K. Shanmuga Sundaram, MP, has urged the Centre to ban the import of coconut oil until the market price of copra increases.
In a petition to the Secretary, Department of Farmers’ Welfare, Manoj Ahuja, the MP said the government’s move to levy zero duty on edible oils has hit farmers as demand for indigenously-produced coconut oil decreased owing to the imported oils.
Tamil Nadu has around 4.65 lakh hectare of coconut cultivable that rendered an output of 3,751 tonne in 2021, he said in the petition.
He said, “The prices of coconut and copra have seen a sharp 50% decline compared to 2021. At the market, a single coconut was priced at ₹16 and copra was ₹150 a kg. in 2021. This year the same has reduced to ₹8 and ₹80 respectively. The costs of fertilizers, urea and potash and labour costs have risen by more than 50% since 2021, which has adversely affected the farmers.”
Further, the sudden uptick in whitefly attacks and Root Wilt Disease (RWD) recently also cut production, the MP said.
He said that since there are no government schemes or subsidies for the cultivation of coconuts, production has drastically decreased by 50% in the last year.
Published - December 12, 2022 07:06 pm IST

ARTICLE 194
TITLE: Fire at coconut oil mill under Kallamkunnu Service Co-operative Bank 
URL: https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/kerala/fire-at-coconut-oil-mill-under-kallamkunnu-service-co-operative-bank/article66327438.ece

A fire that broke out at a coconut mill under the Kallamkunnu Service Co-operative Bank in Nadavarambu on Sunday caused a loss of ₹1.2 cr.
The fire was noticed at 10.45 a.m. on Sunday at the Kalpasree mill near Nadavarambu junction. Sunday being a holiday, there were no workers in the mill.
Local residents informed the police and fire and rescue force when they saw smoke emanating from the mill. The fire and rescue units from Irinjalakuda station rushed to the spot.
As fire spread to coconut oil stored in tanks, copra and machines, more forces from Kodungallur, Mala, Chalakudy and Puthukad joined the mission. The fire was brought under control by 12 noon and was completely doused by 3 p.m.
The fire was suspected to have been triggered by a short circuit. A loss of ₹1.2 cr has been estimated. Machinery for extracting and purifying oil were destroyed in the fire.
According to the bank President Pradeep Menon, the mill has insurance coverage.
Published - January 01, 2023 08:16 pm IST

ARTICLE 195
TITLE: DGFT extends ban on palm oil imports through Kerala ports
URL: https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/markets/commodities/dgft-extends-ban-on-palm-oil-imports-through-kerala-ports/article66332719.ece

The Director-General of Foreign Trade (DGFT) has extended the ban on palm oil imports through Kerala ports until further orders. It has also extended import duty waiver on refined palm oil and palmolein oil.
Both the duty waiver and the ban on imports at Kerala ports were to end on December 31. The Government banned the import of palm group of oils through Kerala ports in 2007 to protect coconut growers.
The extension of the ban on palm oil imports reportedly comes on the Coconut Development Board’s request and various farmer organisations, fearing increased arrivals, especially when Indonesia lifted restrictions on palm oil imports. This may further depress coconut oil prices in the domestic market now ruling at ₹139.
Stagnant consumption
Official sources said the Kerala’s annual edible coconut oil consumption is around 3 lakh tonnes in the last few years. However, consumption is almost stagnant even at low prices against the production of 5.56 lakh tonnes in 2021-22.
The Board has occasionally taken up marketing campaigns to increase consumption, citing its health benefits. However, industry sources pointed out that, of late, there was no generic promotion from the Board.
Cochin Port Users Forum had urged the DGFT to lift the palm oil import restrictions to shore up the port’s revenue. They pointed out that the government implemented the ban to curb the sliding of coconut oil prices with no desired results.
However, industry sources noted that there is no point in continuing with the ban through Kerala ports, as imported palm oil is still flowing freely to the state by road after unloading it at Tuticorin and New Mangalore ports.
Published on January 3, 2023

ARTICLE 196
TITLE: Trade bodies oppose extension of palm oil import ban through Kerala ports
URL: https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/economy/agri-business/trade-bodies-oppose-extending-palm-oil-import-ban-in-kerala-ports/article66337873.ece

Trade bodies and port users in Kerala have hit out against the Directorate-General of Foreign Trade (DGFT)‘s decision to extend the import ban on palm oil through ports in the State. The decision will hit the revenue of many minor ports in the State, they say.
Munshid Ali, Secretary of the Kerala Exporters’ Forum, said minor ports such as Kollam and Beypore are gearing up to receive more cargo after modernisation, and the DGFT’s move will hinder their development.
Road transportation of cargo unloaded at neighbouring Mangaluru and Thoothukudi ports is likely to increase the retail price of palm oil in the local market.
The exporters’ forum and other chambers of commerce have made several representations for lifting the ban on import through Kerala ports.
The Forum urged the Kerala Government, and the State Agriculture and Industries Department to jointly appeal to the Centre to reconsider the decision. It has also requested MPs from Kerala to raise the issue in Parliament.
‘No tangible benefits’
Prakash Iyer, Chairman, Cochin Port Users’ Forum, said palm oil import through Cochin Port was banned in 2007 to arrest the falling price of coconut oil. However, after 15 years, neither the coconut farmers nor the government have got the desired results on account of the road transportation of palm oil to Kerala. This has not only hit traffic at Cochin and Beypore ports, but the business of exim trade and logistic partners.
Iyer also cited the instance of the ban on natural rubber imports through Cochin Port, while allowing the same through Thoothukudi, Chennai and New Mangalore ports, which increased costs for the industry, but did not reduce usage of the commodity.
The Cochin Port Users’ Forum has requested the Centre to have a re-look at the DGFT notification considering the trade interests of the port community. It has also suggested that the government find new ways to promote coconut oil consumption by highlighting its health benefits across markets, including exports.
Published on January 4, 2023

ARTICLE 197
TITLE: Massive fire at edible oil godown in Howrah, 15 engines working to douse it 
URL: http://www.newindianexpress.com/nation/2023/oct/14/massive-fire-at-edible-oil-godown-in-howrah-15-engines-working-to-douse-it-2623891.html

HOWARAH: A massive fire broke out at a godown of edible oil in West Bengal's Howrah district on Saturday morning, officials said.
According to the fire department, a total of fifteen fire engines were working to douse the fire.
The fire broke out at the godown of Emami Agrotech in Bhagabatipur in the Sankrail police station area around 6:30 a.m., they said.
Fifteen fire engines were working to bring the blaze under control, they said.
The cause of the fire is yet to be ascertained, officials said, adding that there were no reports of anyone being injured in the incident.

ARTICLE 198
TITLE: Ban import of palm oil, demand Tiruppur ryots
URL: https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/tamil-nadu/2024/Mar/18/ban-import-of-palm-oil-demand-tiruppur-ryots

TIRUPPUR: Hundreds of farmers held a rally near the Tiruppur district collectorate seeking the inclusion of coconut oil and groundnut oil for sale through Public Distribution System throughout Tamil Nadu.
Farmers assembled at a private marriage hall near Palladam road and raised slogans asking officials to stop the sale of palm oil in PDS shops. They said several thousand tonnes of refined palm oil are imported every year from Malaysia and are widely distributed in all the PDS shops in Tamil Nadu and other states. However, coconut trees are grown throughout the country and the price of copra has dropped to Rs 10.
The protesting farmers claimed that if the State and the Union government procured coconut oil and other crops through cooperative departments and civil supplies departments, it could greatly benefit coconut farmers. So, we seek an immediate ban on the import of palm oil from Malaysia and initiate procurement of coconut oil for the welfare of farmers.
The rally ended near the collectorate.

ARTICLE 199
TITLE: Coconut farmers seek ban on palm oil import
URL: https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/tamil-nadu/2024/Apr/11/coconut-farmers-seek-ban-on-palm-oil-import

TIRUPPUR: Around 40 coconut farmers launched a hunger strike in Avinashipalayam town in Tiruppur district claiming political parties failed to fulfil their poll promise, especially on procurement of copra.
A large number of farmers assembled on a farmland in Avinashipalayam near Tiruppur city. They raised slogans demanding a ban on the sale of palm oil in Public Distribution System shops.
Citing the DMK election manifesto for the 2021 Legislative Assembly election promising procurement of copra from farmers, the protesters said the promise remains unfulfilled.
“The state government failed and several thousand tonnes of refined palm oil are imported every year from Malaysia. These are widely distributed across all PDS shops in Tamil Nadu and other states. Meanwhile, copra price has dropped to `10 with the large availability of coconut,” the farmers said.
The farmers demanded the state and union governments to procure coconut oil and other crops through cooperative departments and civil supplies departments for the benefit of coconut farmers. So, they sought an immediate ban on the import of palm oil from Malaysia and initiated the procurement of coconut oil for the welfare of farmers.
They also wanted the Prime Minister Narendra Modi to launch coconut oil products under a new brand name and create an agency for the procurement of copra.

ARTICLE 200
TITLE: Edible oil industry urges Centre not to extend export ban on de-oiled rice bran
URL: https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/economy/agri-business/edible-oil-industry-urges-centre-not-to-extend-export-ban-on-de-oiled-rice-bran/article68217583.ece

Edible oil industry body Solvent Extractors Association of India (SEA) has requested the central government not to extend the ban on the exports of de-oiled rice bran, which is presently under prohibition. The government initially banned the export of the commodity in July 2023 for four months and later extended it until March 2024, and then again by another four months till July.
The move was intended apparently to address inflation in milk prices and fodder costs. De-oiled rice bran (DORB) is a by-product of the rice milling process that's made from the pressed cake of rice bran after oil is extracted from it. It is widely used as livestock feed. India typically exports about 5 to 6 lakh tonnes of de-oiled rice bran, primarily to Vietnam, Thailand, and other Asian countries, establishing itself as a reliable supplier in the international market.
"De-oiled rice bran prices are now at a lower level and are likely to decrease further with increased availability of DDGS. In light of these facts and the sharp fall in prices, the Association has appealed to the government not to extend the prohibition beyond July 31, 2024," as per a letter written by the industry body's President, Ajay Jhunjhunwala to its members. The industry body is of the view that India, over the past 30 years, has successfully developed an export market for de-oiled rice bran, primarily serving Vietnam, Thailand, Bangladesh and other Asian countries.
Meanwhile, India's overall oilmeal exports during April 2024 were 6 per cent lower on a yearly basis at 4.65 lakh tonnes. During the same month last year, the total exports were 4.93 lakh tonnes, industry data showed. Much of the decline in overall exports in April could be attributed to the prohibition of exports of de-oiled rice bran. In break up, exports of soybean meal rose while that of mustard meal declined.
Oilmeals are the residue left over after the extraction of oil from oilseeds and it is widely utilized as livestock feed globally. The total oilmeal exports during November-April, the first six months of the current marketing year, indicated the revival of soybean meal exports which jumped from 10.4 lakh tonnes to 16.6 lakh metric tons. While rapeseed meal exports are down by nearly 23 per cent so far this season at 9.3 lakh tonnes.
The industry body said last year the exports were higher as India could export substantial quantities due to price advantage vis-a-vis other supplying countries.India is the world's second-largest consumer and leading vegetable oil importer, and meets 60 per cent of its needs through imports, primarily from Indonesia and Malaysia. While oilseed production in India has witnessed growth over the years, it has not kept pace with consumption, leading to a continued reliance on imports.
Published on May 26, 2024

ARTICLE 201
TITLE:  - BW Businessworld
URL: https://businessworld.in/article/indonesia-bans-palm-oil-exports-as-global-food-inflation-spikes-426300

Indonesia, the world's top palm oil producer, announced plans to ban exports of the most widely used vegetable oil on Friday, in a shock move that could further inflame surging global food inflation.
The halting of shipments of the cooking oil and its raw material, widely used in products ranging from cakes to cosmetics, could raise costs for packaged food producers globally and force governments to choose between using vegetable oils in food or for biofuel. Indonesia counts for more than half of global palm oil supply.
In a video broadcast, Indonesia's President Joko Widodo said he wanted to ensure the availability of food products at home, after global food inflation soared to a record high following Russia's invasion of major crop producer Ukraine.
"I will monitor and evaluate the implementation of this policy so availability of cooking oil in the domestic market becomes abundant and affordable," he said.
The announcement will hurt consumers in top buyer India and globally, said, Atul Chaturvedi, president of trade body the Solvent Extractors Association of India (SEA).
"This move is rather unfortunate and totally unexpected," he said.
Alternative vegetable oil prices spiked in response to the measure which will take effect on April 28. Soybean oil, the second most used vegetable oil, rose 4.5 per cent to a record high of 83.21 cents per pound on the Chicago Board of Trade.
Global prices of crude palm oil, which Indonesia uses for cooking oil, have surged to historic highs this year amid rising demand and weak output from top producers Indonesia and Malaysia, plus a move by Indonesia to restrict palm oil exports in January that was lifted in March.
Household product and food companies including Procter & Gamble Co, Nestle SA and Unilever PLC are large purchasers of palm oil. Oreo cookie maker Mondelez International Inc accounts for 0.5 per cent of palm oil consumption globally, according to its website.
Other countries have experimented with crop protectionism to try to keep domestic prices down. Argentina, the world's top exporter of processed soy, briefly halted new overseas sales of soy oil and meal in mid-March before hiking the export tax rate on those products to 33 per cent from 31 per cent.
The U.S. Department of Agriculture urged international cooperation during the war in Ukraine, rather than export bans.
Global edible oil markets have been roiled this year by Russia's invasion of Ukraine, a move Russia calls a "special operation" to demilitarise its neighbour, which cut off shipments of sunflower oil from the region.
The Black Sea accounts for 76 per cent of world sunoil exports and commercial shipping from the region has been severely affected since Russian forces entered Ukraine in February.
Large supplies of alternatives including soy and rapeseed oil are not readily available either, after droughts hurt the most recent crops in Argentina, Brazil and Canada.
New facilities for processing soy and canola oil are expected to open in the United States and Canada respectively in coming years, as demand for plant-based biofuels grows, but ramping up production in the near term will be difficult.
Industry group the Clean Fuels Alliance America said the move could hurt biofuel producers, even though U.S. biodiesel and renewable diesel producers don't use palm oil, as supplies of all oils are tight.
"Sky would be the limit for edible oil prices now. Buyers were banking on palm oil after sunoil supplies fell because of the Ukraine war," a Mumbai-based dealer at a global trading firm said.
"Now they (buyers) don't have any option as soyoil supplies are also limited."
Malaysian producers say the world's No. 2 palm oil exporter, which is facing a production shortfall due to a pandemic-induced labour shortage, is unlikely to be able to plug the gap.
Indonesia has since 2018 stopped the issuance of new permits for palm oil plantations, often blamed for deforestation and destroying habitats of endangered animals such as orangutans.
Palm oil industry association GAPKI said it would adhere to the policy but had reservations.
"If this policy has any negative impact on the sustainability of the palm oil sector, we would ask the government to re-evaluate the policy," it said in a statement.
In Indonesia, the retail price of cooking oil averages 26,436 rupiah ($1.84) per litre, up more than 40% so far this year. In some provinces across the country, the prices have nearly doubled in the past month alone, according to a price monitoring page.
Demonstrations by students have taken place in several cities across Indonesia in recent days over high cooking oil prices.
Indonesia's government has set a cap of 14,000 rupiah per litre for bulk cooking oil, but Trade Ministry data showed that it was sold at more than 18,000 rupiah this month.
A government investigation is underway into alleged corruption involving sought-after export permits.
(Reuters)
Subscribe to our newsletter to get updates on our latest news

ARTICLE 202
TITLE: Exporters body urges Centre to lift palm oil import ban via Kerala ports
URL: https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/economy/agri-business/exporters-body-urges-centre-to-lift-palm-oil-import-ban-via-kerala-ports/article68405694.ece

Stressing that the need for the removal of palm oil imports through Kerala ports, the Kerala Exporters Forum (KEF) has urged the Directorate-General of Foreign Trade (DGFT) to come up with a proper timeline for removing the trade ban on palm oil rather than continuing with unending extensions.
DGFT imposed the ban in 2007 and subsequently, it extended it to protect the interest of coconut farmers, citing public interest.
A study carried out by KEF said the protection of coconut and coconut oil production in Kerala by banning import of palm oil may or may not have been the right policy decision. But 17 years of protection is more than enough for the revival of a sector. If the sector has not been able to be competitive in the international market and faces fluctuations in the prices and production, then the problem lies elsewhere, the report said.
Lack of evidence
There is no evidence to suggest that large import of palm oil has caused the drop in prices of coconut and coconut oil. Rather the decline is the result of the integration of the domestic market with the international market for coconuts. The fluctuations and shocks in the international market is the reason behind the sudden drop in price of coconut and coconut oil, the report said.
The ban, according to the report, resulted in the loss of business for Cochin Port, impacting the development of other minor ports in the State and hit the consumer interest. This has also led to rise in logistics costs as palm oil imported at the neighbouring ports are transported to refineries in Kerala via road, leading to an increase in the price of palm oil for end-consumers due to the tax levied on import to Kerala via road.
Karnataka and Tamil Nadu (two States with coconut production higher than Kerala) governments have not banned the import of palm oil. The report also requested the government to set up an expert committee to study the magnitude of revenue loss due to the trade ban.
Published on July 15, 2024

ARTICLE 203
TITLE: Kerala ports lose out as palm oil import ban completes 17 years
URL: https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/kerala/2024/Jul/30/kerala-ports-lose-out-as-palm-oil-import-ban-completes-17-years-4

KOCHI: The ban on import of palm oil via ports in Kerala has had no impact on its entry and consumption in the state. The only effect of the ban, imposed in May 2007, is the huge loss in the revenue of the Cochin port and other minor ports in the state, say experts.
Palm oil imported via neghbouring Tuticorin or New Mangalore ports enter the state throgh roads. Tuticorin is in Tamil Nadu and New Mangalore in Karnataka. The ban was imposed to “protect 10 million coconut farmers” in Kerala. Interestingly, Karnataka produces more coconuts than Kerala and Tamil Nadu nearly the same quantity. Moreover, the number of coconut farmers in Kerala has dwindled in the last two decades.
“If the palm oil that arrive in Mangalore and Tuticorin ports have no impact on coconut farmers in Karnataka and Tamil Nadu, which are now bigger players in coconut industry, what’s the need for Kerala to continue with the ban?” wonders Munshid Ali, secretary, Kerala Exporters’ Forum. “There is hardly 50km from Mangalore port to Kasaragod. And Tuticorin is not far from Thiruvananthapuram either. Palm oil come into the state easily from there through the road network.
Kerala is estimated to consume over 2.5 lakh tonnes of palm oil per year and the price difference between the coconut oil and palm oil make the road transportation an attractive option for importers. While the palm oil price ranges between Rs 120-170/litre, the coconut oil price rules in the range of Rs 230-300/litre. The wholesale price of palm oil is about Rs 100/litre compared to Rs 150/litre for coconut oil.
“The ban to protect coconut and coconut oil production in Kerala may or may not have been the right policy decision in 2007. But 17 years is more than enough for revival of a sector. If the sector has not been able to be competitive in the international market and faces fluctuations in the prices and production, then the problem lies elsewhere,” says M S Raunaq, assistant professor, Department of Economics, University of Kerala, who along with three others in the department conducted a detailed study on ‘Palm oil import ban through sea ports in Kerala’.
Palm oil is used largely in the food processing, as well as hotels, restaurants and catering segments, which account for 45-50% of the overall consumption. The household and industrial segments consume the rest, according to Crisil Ratings, a research firm. India depends on the world’s largest producers -- Malaysia and Indonesia -- for over 90% of its crude palm oil.
Ali says the figure of one crore coconut farmers in Kerala mentioned by the Coconut Development Board (CDB) to press for a ban on palm oil imports is an exaggerated number. “It seems the CDB has taken those persons, who have even two or three coconut trees in their backyard as coconut farmers. An overwhelming majority of tender coconuts that you see along the Kerala roads for sales come from Pollachi.”
Anand Venkitaraman, president of Cochin Chamber of Commerce and Industry, says there is a huge demand for palm oil in the Kerala market. “The import ban came when coconut farmers were struggling after the coconut oil prices declined to Rs 47/kg. Now it’s Rs 200/kg and Keralites, with increased purchasing power, now prioritise quality,” he says.
Ali points out that besides Cochin and Vizhinjam, minor ports such as Azhikkal are losing huge revenues due to the ban. “A tanker of 50,000 litres capacity at Kochi and another with 20,000 litres in Azhikkal had been idling empty for the last several years after the ban,” he says.

ARTICLE 204
TITLE: Edible Oil Body SEA Urges Govt To Lift Ban On Commodity Futures Trading
URL: https://ipanewspack.com/edible-oil-body-sea-urges-govt-to-lift-ban-on-commodity-futures-trading/#utm_source=rss&utm_medium=rss&utm_campaign=edible-oil-body-sea-urges-govt-to-lift-ban-on-commodity-futures-trading

NEW DELHI: Edible oil industry SEA on Monday called on the government to lift a ban on futures trading in key agricultural commodities, including crude palm oil and soyabean, citing significant financial impact on its members.
The ban, first implemented in December 2021 on seven agricultural commodities, has been extended multiple times with the current extension running through December 20, 2024.
The Solvent Extractors Association of India (SEA) has appealed to five ministers, including Home Minister Amit Shah and Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman, arguing that the absence of futures trading has hindered price risk management and market development.
“The industry was hopeful that the suspension would be lifted to enable smoother operations, but the continuation of this restriction has further weakened an essential risk mitigation tool,” SEA President Sanjeev Asthana said in a representation made to the ministers.
SEA emphasised that studies have shown futures trading does not significantly drive inflation, a key concern when the ban was implemented.
Current soyabean prices are trading below the government-set minimum support price (MSP) of Rs 4,892 per quintal, while rapeseed prices are slightly above its MSP of Rs 5,950, the industry body said.
The association particularly stressed the need to resume futures trading in internationally traded commodities like crude palm oil and crude soybean oil, arguing that the ban has left businesses exposed to greater price volatility.
With inputs from PTI

ARTICLE 205
TITLE: Edible oil racket busted, 1 arrested in joint drive
URL: https://www.thehansindia.com/telangana/edible-oil-racket-busted-1-arrested-in-joint-drive-953178

Hyderabad: The Hyderabad Commissioner’s Task Force, South-East Team, along with the Food Safety Officials, raided a shop in Mahaboob Mansion, Malakpet, and apprehended a person for repacking and selling edible oils with expired labels and using whitener on labels to suppress the expiry date and batch numbers without a repacking license. The police seized expired products worth Rs 1.9 lakh.
The arrested person was identified as Ashok Kumar Agarwal (51), owner of Sri Ganesh Balaji Lakkadatar Oil. The police seized 161 bottles and 31 tins, 1,014 litres of oil.  
According to the police, on Monday, the Task Force team, along with the Food Safety officials, raided Sri Ganesh Balaji Lakkadatar Oil in Sri Krupa Market. A thorough inquiry revealed that Agarwal was purchasing edible oils in bulk and repacking them without a repacking license. He concealed the expiry date and batch numbers on labels by using whiteners and supplying oil to needy customers and gaining profits illegally. The officials seized 1,014 litres of oil worth Rs 1.9 lakh. He, along with seized material, was handed over to FSO, GHMC, Circle-VI, Malakpet, for further action.

ARTICLE 206
TITLE: Watch out for these stocks: Niva Bupa, Kotak Mahindra Bank, Ugro Capital, edible oil companies, IndiGo, Prestige Estates, IRB Infrastructure, IFB Agro, Thomas Cook, KRN Heat
URL: https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/markets/watch-out-for-these-stocks-niva-bupa-kotak-mahindra-bank-ugro-capital-edible-oil-companies-indigo-prestige-estates-irb-infrastructure-ifb-agro-thomas-cook-krn-heat/article69646192.ece

According to market buzz, True North entity, Fettle Tone LLP, is looking to dilute 6.7 per cent, and its MD and CEO Krishnan Ramachandran plans to offload 0.5 per cent, through a block deal in Niva Bupa Health Insurance. The indicative price is likely to be ₹82 a share.
Bharat Coking Coal Ltd (BCCL), a wholly-owned subsidiary of Coal India Ltd (CIL), has filed a draft red herring prospectus (DRHP) with capital market regulator SEBI, as well as BSE and NSE, for its proposed initial public offering. In a regulatory filing on Saturday, CIL said the DRHP pertains to an offer for sale (OFS) of up to 46.57 crore equity shares by Coal India. The IPO remains subject to receipt of necessary approvals, market conditions, and other considerations, it added.
The government has cut the basic custom duty on crude palm oil, crude soyabean oil and crude sunflower oil by 10 per cent to bring down the prices of cooking oils and protect domestic processing industries. India imports more than 50 per cent of its domestic edible oil requirement. Among others, shares such as Ajanta Soya, Patanjali, AWL Agri Business, Sundrop Brands and Goku Agro will remain in focus.
Prestige Estates Projects Ltd will launch multiple housing projects across major cities this fiscal year with an estimated revenue of more than ₹42,000 crore, as it looks to expand business to capitalise on strong consumer demand. According to its latest investor presentation, Bengaluru-based Prestige Estates plans to launch as many as 25 residential projects having 44.80 million sq ft of developable area, with an estimated gross development value of ₹42,120 crore, in this financial year. These projects are lined up in Bengaluru, Chennai, Hyderabad, Mumbai, Delhi-NCR and Goa.
Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers Ltd. (GRSE) achieved another milestone today with the signing of a contract for the major refit of Lightship ‘Indira Point’. Under the contract, GRSE will carry out dry dock and afloat repairs, including maintenance of the vessel’s hull, propulsion, onboard systems, and critical machinery. The refit is scheduled to be completed within 300 days. The contract underscores the shared commitment to maintaining vital navigational assets that are key to the country’s economic and security interests.
Kotak Mahindra Bank on Saturday announced the promotion of Paritosh Kashyap, currently group president, to the post of executive director (ED), subject to regulatory approvals. Kashyap has been with the Kotak Group for over three decades and has been heading the wholesale banking business since 2022 He has led several key businesses including Structured Finance, Real Estate, and Debt Capital Markets during his long career with the Group. Kotak Mahindra Bank Ltd on Saturday said Deputy Managing Director Shanti Ekambaram will retire from her role effective October 31, 2025, marking the end of a more than three-decade-long stint with the financial services group.
Ircon International has received a work order worth ₹1,068.35 crore from East Central Railway, Indian Railway for Engineering, Procurement and Construction (EPC) of a New BG Rail Bridge (2x32.086m Open Web Steel Girder + 33x122.0 m Open Web Steel Girder) with sub-structure of double line Track and Superstructure of Single line Track across the River Ganga between Bikramshila and Katareah Stations on a New Railway Line Project invited by East Central Railway. The said order is expected to be completed in 1460 days.
The board of IFB Agro Industries has approved a proposal to acquire the entire commercial shrimp and freshwater fish feed business of Cargill India, marking a strategic move to consolidate its aqua feed operations. The acquisition – on a slump sale basis – includes Cargill India’s manufacturing facilities at Vijayawada and Rajahmundry in Andhra Pradesh, along with feed formulations, assets, business contracts, liabilities, licenses, employees, and other associated resources, the company said in a regulatory filing
IRB Infrastructure Trust, the country’s first listed Infrastructure Investment Trust, will transfer its three highway assets, having an enterprise value of around ₹8,450 crore, to IRB InvIT Fund. The share purchase agreement between the subsidiaries of infrastructure major IRB Infrastructure and Developers was executed on Friday.
Rail Vikas Nigam Ltd and Texmaco Rail & Engineering Ltd have signed a memorandum of understanding to drive innovation and accelerate modernisation in the railway infrastructure in India, a statement said. Announcing the strategic partnership, Texmaco in the statement said that the collaboration aims to combine complementary strengths enhancing capabilities across the sector.
InterGlobe Aviation (IndiGo) has tied up with Air France-KLM, Delta and Virgin Atlantic Airways offering passengers connections to over 30 destinations in the Europe and the US. While the partnership will enable IndiGo to drive occupancy on its Amsterdam and Manchester flights beginning July, it will help Delta and it’s European partner airlines to compete with Air India and Emirates, which have the highest share on the India-US and India -Europe routes. On Sunday, the airlines announced a code share partnership that will allow IndiGo to sell tickets on KLM flights to 30 destinations in Europe; Delta and KLM flights over Amsterdam to the US; and Canada and Virgin Atlantic flights to the US. -- BL
Thomas Cook (India) on Friday announced a strategic partnership with Muthoot Forex, the foreign exchange division of the Muthoot Group, to expand the reach of its Borderless Travel and Study Buddy Cards.
KRN HVAC Products , a wholly-owned subsidiary of KRN Heat Exchanger and Refrigeration, has commenced commercial production and operations at its manufacturing plant located at Alwar, Rajasthan. The plant is engaged in the manufacture of heat exchangers and HVAC Products.
UGRO Capital, India’s leading DataTech driven MSME Financing NBFC, has announced that its Securities Allotment & Transfer Committee has approved the final terms of its rights issue. This decision follows the board’s May 20, 2025, announcement of a ₹915-crore preferential CCD issuance and a concurrent proposal to offer up to ₹400 crore on a rights basis to existing public shareholders. Under the approved terms, UGRO Capital will offer new equity shares totalling up to ₹400 Ccrore at a price of ₹162 per share. This pro-rata offering ensures that all existing public shareholders have a fair opportunity to maintain their stake and guard against dilution as the company continues to expand its balance sheet and deepen its DataTech advantage in serving India’s underserved MSMEs.
Published on June 2, 2025

ARTICLE 207
TITLE: Sales of chips hit in Kerala as Nendran banana turns cheap and coconut oil pricey
URL: https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/economy/agri-business/sales-of-chips-hit-in-kerala-as-nendran-banana-turns-cheap-and-coconut-oil-pricey/article69892573.ece

As Onam approaches, two key agricultural products in Kerala—Nendran banana and coconut oil—known for complementing each other in the making of banana chips, are now presenting a mixed scenario. This festive season, falling banana prices and rising coconut oil costs are casting a shadow over chips sales.
Trade sources said what has happened is that manufacturers of chips have cut their purchases of coconut oil as its prices have soared. This, in turn, affected sales of chips and in turn, pulled down banana prices.
L.A. Joshy, a Nendran banana dealer in the Ernakulam market, told businessline that wholesale prices have dropped to ₹35 per kg from ₹60 a month ago. He attributed the fall to increased production in Tamil Nadu, where cultivation area was expanded and bulk production intensified to meet Kerala’s growing demand.
Typically, a dip in banana prices would encourage chips manufacturers to stock up ahead of Onam, catering to the seasonal boom in demand. However, soaring coconut oil prices are weighing heavily on the chips industry, neutralising the benefits of cheaper bananas. As a result, sales of both bananas and coconut oil have taken a hit, he said.
Harris of Malabar Chips in Kochi said rising coconut oil prices have forced his outlet to increase the price of chips by around ₹120-140 per kg based on the fluctuations in coconut oil rates. They are now selling chips at ₹560 against ₹440-480, when oil price was ruling stable. The rising price also facilitated consumers to reduce their purchase from one kg to 500 or 250 gm, he said, adding that the sales drop was around 10-15 per cent.
He said he is using only good quality coconut oil which is costing more than ₹500 in the retail market. There are plenty of cheap oils available in the market, which would affect the taste of chips.
Last year, the prices of chips were ruling in the range between ₹350 and ₹380. He expressed the hope that the prices would come down during the Onam festival once the coconut oil prices begin to decline. There are positive indications from the market towards this effect.
Fried banana too hit
Not just makers of chips, even tea vendors who sell Pazham pori or fried banana-based evening snacks are cutting down purchases due to the spike in oil costs. With regular customers unwilling to pay higher prices, vendors are caught between raising prices or bearing losses. Some have already hiked snack prices to offset the increased cost of coconut oil, affecting sales, he said.
ICAR Emeritus Professor P. Indiradevi said parts of Tamil Nadu and Karnataka have been ramping up Nendran banana cultivation to cater to the Onam market. Tamil Nadu ranks fourth in banana production with 1.02 lakh hectares under cultivation and 39.39 lakh tonnes produced in 2021–22. Nendran is primarily grown in Coimbatore, Erode, Trichy, and Kanyakumari. Compared to Tamil Nadu’s traditional varieties like Yelakki, Poovan, and Rasthali, Nendran offers higher net return, though production costs are around ₹15 per kg—nearly double that of Kerala.
A glimmer of hope has emerged as copra and coconut oil prices have started to decline, falling by ₹10 and ₹6 per kg, respectively, in the past week. Thalath Mahmood, President of the Cochin Oil Merchants Association, said the drop is due to increased arrivals from the new copra harvest and expects coconut oil to fall below ₹350 during Onam. Currently, coconut oil and copra are priced at ₹382 and ₹241 per kg, rsspectively, in the Kochi market, he said.
Published on August 4, 2025

ARTICLE 208
TITLE: 10,000 Kg Rotten Dates And Adulterated Oil Seized: What Kanpur’s Festival Crackdown Reveals
URL: https://thelogicalindian.com/10000-kg-rotten-dates-and-adulterated-oil-seized-what-kanpurs-festival-crackdown-reveals/

Attention!
        You have tried to access a site at https://thelogicalindian.com:443/10000-kg-rotten-dates-and-adulterated-oil-seized-what-kanpurs-festival-crackdown-reveals/ which Tripleplay considers to be harmful.
       
  
      
        
        
          If you believe this to be an error, please contact your administrator.
          customercare@tripleplay.in
          
        
       
  
      
        Leave page
        Proceed anyway
        
          We are working on the redirection to the site. This operation could take a while.

ARTICLE 209
TITLE: Collection of reused cooking oil from eateries goes up three-fold in Madurai  
URL: https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/tamil-nadu/2024/Aug/03/collection-of-reused-cooking-oil-from-eateries-goes-up-three-fold-in-madurai

MADURAI: Health experts have warned against using repurposed cooking oil at hotels in Madurai, and the food safety department has been diligently collecting reused cooking oil from hotels and eateries in the district.
As per official records, the average collection of repurposed cooking oil was 6,000 litres from hotels and eateries in Madurai district as of June 2023. Currently, 18,000 litres of repurposed cooking oil have been collected monthly since June 2024. Health professionals' warnings against using reused oils in kitchens at domestic and commercial establishments have contributed to the increased collection in oil, say official sources.
Speaking to TNIE, former dean of Government Rajaji Hospital (Madurai) Dr Rathinavel said, "Several health complications are caused by cooking with repurposed cooking oil as it contains compounds like Acrylamide. Primary problems include the deterioration of the nutritional value and formation of harmful compounds, causing complications such as gastritis and fatty liver. The repeated reheating of cooking oil alters the composition and releases Acrolein, which is a potential carcinogen."
Madurai Hotel Owners Association president K Lakshmana Kumar said, "We are aware of the health problems associated with using repurposed cooking oil. We have issued a mild warning to all our members. If a customer suffers from any health ailment due to the use of reused oil, we will not support the hotel or eatery. There are health hazards, including food poisoning, when chicken is cooked in repurposed oil."
Speaking to TNIE, FSSAI Designated Officer Dr V Jeyarama Pandian said, "We are delighted that awareness about repurposed cooking oil is increasing. This is the primary reason for increase in the collection of repurposed cooking oil from food business operators (FBO). Most hotel owners are willing to give the used oil to collection agencies of the food safety department. Depending upon the volume, hotels are giving oil in the range of Rs 40 to Rs 60 per litre. The reluctance is reducing and we believe that the reused oil can be a potential feedstock for manufacturing biodiesel."

ARTICLE 210
TITLE: What actually happens when cooking oil is reused and why it matters - The Times of India
URL: https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/life-style/food-news/what-actually-happens-when-cooking-oil-is-reused-and-why-it-matters/articleshow/124779839.cms

When oil is heated again and again, it doesn’t just “get a little darker.” What’s really happening is a slow, invisible chain reaction. Heat, oxygen, moisture, and food particles conspire to rewrite the oil’s chemistry. Triglycerides, the molecules that make up most edible oils, begin to split. The double bonds in unsaturated fats oxidize, and the oil forms polar compounds, peroxides, and aldehydes. What was once a neutral medium for frying starts turning unstable and reactive. These changes aren’t harmless or cosmetic. Repeated heating alters the oil’s structure, taste, and smoke point and what’s more important, how it behaves inside the human body. That faint burnt smell, the darker hue, the slightly sticky texture? Those are clues that the oil is now chemically different from what came out of the bottle. 
When good oil turns toxic 
Every time you reheat oil, its unsaturated bonds - the very ones that make it “heart-healthy” are the first to suffer. Polyunsaturated oils like sunflower, soybean, or safflower are particularly vulnerable because their structure is more open to oxidation. Over multiple heat cycles, this creates a family of unstable 
byproducts known as aldehydes, compounds such as acrolein, 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal (4-HNE), and 4-hydroxy-2-hexenal (4-HHE).
These 
aldehydes are biologically active, meaning they don’t just pass through the body. Studies show they can bind to proteins and DNA, triggering oxidative stress and inflammation. Animal studies have linked high aldehyde intake to increased markers of atherosclerosis, cell damage, and even neurodegenerative changes.
In simpler terms, the oil that once cushioned your heart could, after enough reheating, start working against it. 
What research actually says
The science around reheated oil is surprisingly consistent, even if it hasn’t yet made its way into kitchen habits. A 
2020 study found that repeatedly heated oils raised LDL cholesterol and blood pressure in animal models. Another experiment published in Food Research International noted DNA damage and elevated oxidative markers when rodents were fed fried foods made with reused oil.
Human data is less direct, we don’t live in labs or eat one thing at a time but the mechanistic evidence is strong enough that food scientists and toxicologists treat this as a real concern. 
The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) even issued an advisory in 2019 urging households and eateries not to reuse oil more than three times, citing increased risk of heart disease and cancer-linked compounds in oils heated beyond 180°C.
What’s worrying isn’t the occasional reheat. It’s when oil is recycled for days in commercial kitchens or home fryers without filtration, exposed to high heat and air for hours. That’s when aldehyde levels rise to toxic thresholds. 
What happens to the food itself
When you fry, the oil doesn’t stay in the pan - it gets absorbed. Every samosa, pakora, or chip carries traces of the oil’s breakdown products. The vitamins that once offered antioxidant protection, A, E, and carotenoids, degrade quickly with each heating. Meanwhile, trans-type fats and sticky polar polymers increase, altering both texture and nutrition.
That’s why fries made in old oil often feel heavy and slightly bitter. The crispness fades fast, replaced by a greasy aftertaste. In chemical terms, the food has become a vehicle for oxidized fat molecules and in sensory terms, it’s just less appetizing. 
How many times is too many? 
There isn’t a single magic number because “reuse” depends on several things: the oil type, the frying temperature, and how well it’s handled between uses. 
Highly stable fats like rice bran or groundnut oil hold up better to heat than polyunsaturated ones like sunflower or soybean oil. A controlled study from the University of Arkansas found that certain refined oils could technically survive 8-10 fry cycles under ideal lab conditions - constant temperature, no crumbs, minimal oxygen exposure. But that’s not real life. 
In most home kitchens, conditions are far from controlled. The oil is overheated, left uncovered, and rarely filtered. That’s why food-safety authorities, from India’s FSSAI to the US FDA, all recommend limiting reuse to one or two rounds, and discarding oil that shows any signs of foaming, smoking, or off smell. If it’s darker, thicker, or leaves a sticky film on the pan, it’s done its job. 
Smarter ways to cut the risk
Reusing oil isn’t a crime, it’s a question of care. Most Indian homes, understandably, reuse oil once or twice. What matters is how thoughtfully it’s handled. 
• Control the heat. Keep frying temperatures below 180°C. Extreme heat accelerates oxidation exponentially. 
• Filter after cooling. Strain through a muslin cloth to remove crumbs, which char and trigger rancidity. 
• Store right. Transfer strained oil to an opaque, airtight container and keep it in a cool spot away from sunlight. 
• Avoid cross-use. Don’t fry fish and then reuse the same oil for sweets - odours and oxidation compounds migrate. 
• Top up, don’t mix. Adding a little fresh oil to the old batch is fine, but don’t combine different oils, they degrade unevenly. 
These small habits don’t eliminate the chemistry, but they slow it down. 
The bigger picture: Moderation, not fear
Used oil isn’t poison in one go, nor is it harmless when abused. The truth, like most things in nutrition, lies in balance. Using the same oil once or twice, filtered and properly stored, won’t harm you. But habitual consumption of foods fried in the same batch over many days - especially in commercial settings can raise legitimate health concerns. 
That’s why many modern eateries now use oil-monitoring systems that test “total polar compounds”, a chemical marker of degradation, and replace oil once it crosses a 25% threshold. In India, this guideline is slowly being adopted in large-scale food operations. 
At home, the rule of thumb is simpler: respect the oil’s limits. Just because it still looks usable doesn’t mean it’s stable. 
A final drizzle of wisdom
The oil that gives life to our bhajiyas, fries, and puris is more fragile than we think. Every heating ages it - not in minutes, but in molecules. Yet, handled well, it can serve beautifully and safely. 
So the next time you reach for that pan of old oil, remember: freshness in oil isn’t about wastefulness, it’s about respect, for what goes into your body and what your food deserves. The difference between a comforting crisp and a harmful crunch often comes down to one small decision - when to stop, and start fresh.