Nagpur: A Food and Drug Administration (FDA) team seized 442 kg consignment of âcheese analogueâ on Wednesday. 
After collecting samples, the entire consignment was destroyed by the FDA team comprising food safety officers Raviraj Dabharde, Rajesh Yadav, assistant commissioner, vigilance, AS Mahajan, joint commissioner, vigilance, Rajendra Khade. âWhile authentic paneer costs nearly 380/kg, âcheese analogueâ is pegged at 200/kg in the market,â said Dabharde, adding the price difference is a point of contention along with packaging and labelling.
Emergence and popularity of âcheese analoguesâ as a cheaper alternative in the hotel industry has left the dairy sector fuming, while triggering a debate on legality of its use and supply.
FDA assistant commissioners Prashant Deshmukh and Rohan Shah stated distribution of âcheese analoguesâ is not illegal, as per Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 and Food Products, Standards and Food Additives Regulations 2011. âWhatâs illegal is the absence of declaration and identification of material (cheese analogue) in the packaging along with batch number, expiry date, details of manufacturers, ingredients, and their values. Cheese analogues are being sold as âpaneerâ, which is unacceptable. An informative billing with details as per law is required for trade,â said FDA officials.
Experts stated customers at hotels and the restaurants are victims of this double standard, when served with âcheese analoguesâ as paneer and cheese. 
âAuthentic paneer is made of milk and milk solids and easily melts in the mouth with a sublime milky taste. Cheese analogues are harder and tougher to chew. The chefs try to cover up the defect with spicy gravy and decorations, which makes customers overlook the difference in the texture and taste,â said Deshmukh.
FDA experts also stated âcheese analogueâ is prepared by vegetable oil and milk powder or solids. âThe Butyro refractometer or BR meter index for milk fats is between 40%-44%, but is above 44% for vegetable fats. If FDA analysts find the BR reading more than 44%, itâs concluded as âcheese analogue,â said Deshmukh, adding FDA teams have kicked off a stringent drive against adulterated âpaneerâ. âAlready samples have been collected from two places during our ongoing drive against paneer,â said Deshmukh.
We also published the following articles recently
No more fake cheese? state gets 1st FDA Microbio lab for reliable food testsThe first microbiology laboratory of the state FDA will open at BKC, combating adulteration and contamination. It is part of India's food lab infrastructure, ensuring compliance with regulations. The FDA commissioner oversees the opening, adding to the 900 laboratories in India, with only 10% in the government sector. Non-milk cheese anybody?Maharashtra Food and Drug Administrations are pulling up McDonalds for serving non-milk-based cheese without adequate disclosure. Vegan cheese is made from vegetable oils or plant-based ingredients including nuts, soy, coconut oil, and root vegetables. It involves thickeners like agar or tapioca, nutritional yeast, bacterial cultures, and acids.