Food and Drug Control Administration (FDCA) raided a facility at Gujratâs 
Navsari and seized 3000 kg of âunadulteratedâ ghee. This is not the first of such revelations. In Delhiâs Malviya Nagar too, 450 kg of spurious ghee was seized by a team of food safety commissionerates. It is thus essential that one ensures that the ghee they consume or buy is pure and free from any kinds of preservatives.
Here are a few tips you can follow while buying ghee from your local general store.
Also Read:The right way to add ghee in food for maximum benefitsIndia's liquid goldThanks to the world of social media, from Gen Zâs to health conscious millennials- everyone has recognised and acknowledged the benefits Ghee has to offer. Everyone on the internet is going on and on about the natural goodness of Ghee. Ghee originated in India, where storing butter in such heat was not possible. This âliquid Goldâ is prepared by boiling unsalted butter to remove milk solids and water from it. It provided Indians with a healthier alternative and slowly it spread to Pakistan, Bangladesh, parts of southeast Asia and even Middle east. In the Hindu mythology, Prajapati created ghee. The story goes that Lord Prajapati, the god of offspring, rubbed his hands together and produced it and then that ghee was offered to fire which led to the birth of his offspring. Since then ghee has progressed from being just another ingredient in households to enriching the tastes at gourmet restaurants. While ghee in its purest form can help cure diseases, if consumed adulterated can have adverse effects on the human body.
Benefits of GheeGhee is a rich source of healthy fats. It contains butyrate, a short-chain fatty acid that supports digestive health and has anti-inflammatory properties. Also, it is proven that these essential fatty acids are important for heart health and brain function. In traditional Ayurvedic medicine, ghee is believed to aid digestion and improve nutrient absorption. It is often used as a carrier for herbal preparations to enhance their efficacy. Ghee is often used topically in Ayurvedic practices to moisturize and nourish the skin and hair. It can help treat dry skin, chapped lips, and rough patches. Some studies suggest that the medium-chain fatty acids in ghee can help in weight management by increasing metabolism and promoting the feeling of fullness. During the clarification process, milk solids are removed, making ghee a suitable option for those with lactose intolerance or dairy allergies.
How to identify fake ghee from real oneAppearance and Texture: Ghee in its purest form has a golden color, rich and creamy texture. When held against light it should appear translucent and clear. The pale color of ghee could be indicative of preservatives. This could be the most basic criterion for one to buy ghee.
Packaging and Label: Special attention should be paid to the packaging and label of ghee products. A genuine ghee brand will have all major certificates of regulation compliances on it. 
Aroma and Flavor: Ghee has a nutty flavor and a smooth consistency. The ghee should never smell burnt as it has a high heating point. The burnt smell could be because of the presence of water or addons.
Also Read: 7 ways to use Ghee for healingWhile you can judge the ghee using the above mentioned criteria before buying it, there are also other ways by which you can ensure that the ghee you are consuming is beneficial.
Palm Test: Pour frozen ghee on your palm if it starts melting instantly then the ghee is pure.
Water Test: Fill a glass of normal water at room temperature, add ghee to it, if the ghee floats it is unadulterated and if it sinks then the ghee is infused with addons.
Salt Test: Add a pinch of Hyaluronic acid and tablespoon of salt to two spoons of ghee , after 20 minutes check the color of the ghee if the ghee has turned red it means it is adulterated.
Iodine Test: Add two drops of Iodine solution to ghee if it turns purple then the ghee has a presence of starch in it.
Also Read:What is low-cholesterol ghee and its lesser-known benefitsBoil Test: Boil the ghee, be careful that ghee has a higher heating point so if it starts smelling as burnt then you know it is not pure ghee. Bubbles and steam when boiling the ghee are also indicative of adulterated ghee. After you have boiled the ghee, refrigerate it in a jar. If you see layers forming in the jar there is a presence of some other oil too in the ghee.
7 Benefits of Eating Ghee on an Empty Stomach
Thumb Image Courtesy: Canva