Paneer is a rich source of protein and is used in many forms. From breakfast to dinner and during the festive season, this dairy source of protein is very high in demand, which also gives the players the opportunity to indulge in adulteration. In a recent action, the Noida Food Safety Department seized and destroyed 550 kg of adulterated paneer ahead of the festive season. The FSSAI officially flagged paneer as the most adulterated food item in the country on social media, urging consumers to stay vigilant. 
As per the X post, the paneer samples have been sent for examination in the labs, and the report is awaited.
What does the study say?If we go by reports, a recent nationwide probe by the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) has exposed widespread adulteration in paneer. As per FSSAI data, 83% of sampled paneer sold in India fails to meet safety and quality benchmarks, with roughly 40% considered outright hazardous because of adulteration with palm oil, detergents, urea, and synthetic chemicals.
This has given rise to the concerns over the quality of paneer being circulated in the market and people are looking for equally healthy alternatives. Here, we have curated a list of five non-dairy paneer alternatives to try at home. 
Take a look.
Tofu: Also known as soy paneer, it is high in protein and is great for muscle building, especially for vegans. It contains less saturated fat than paneer and is a rich source of iron and calcium, which is important for bone health.
Mushrooms: Mushrooms like King Oyster and Buttons are umami-rich, low in calories and fat. They are rich in antioxidants like selenium and support immune function.
Almond Paneer: As the name suggests, it is made from almond milk and is said to have heart-healthy fats, a good source of monounsaturated fats. It is good for lactose intolerant or vegan diets. And the rich amount of vitamin E helps skin and hair health.
Chickpea Tofu: It is also called burmese tofu and is high in plant protein, magnesium and folate. Also, it is easy to digest compared to dairy products.
Tempeh: It is a fermented soy product that promotes gut health with probiotics. It is high in protein and fiber and keeps you full longer. It also contains vitamins like B12 and has a low glycemic index, which helps manage blood sugar.
All Images Courtesy: istock