Agartala: To ensure quality food at hotels and restaurants during 
Durga puja, district magistrate (West Tripura) Dr Vishal Kumar issued a warning to all food hubs on Saturday to maintain hygiene in the kitchen and follow the guidelines of the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI).
âStrict action will be taken if adulterated food is found being served.
Our team will conduct random checks on the quality of food and the process of food preparation,â Dr Kumar said. 
Temporary food hubs and restaurants have been opened across the state. The administration does not go for inspection at most of these places, which Dr Kumar intended to pluck.
He held a meeting with the food vendors at all 43 markets of Agartala. He said, âThe meeting was to educate the traders about the rules and guidelines set forth by FSSAI. We urged traders to ensure that there is no adulteration in the food.â
âEdible oil cannot be reused. Cooks should wash their hands before cooking. Gloves should be used if necessary and the use of single-use plastic is prohibited,â the district magistrate added.
We also published the following articles recently
Food fiesta & more: Durga Puja a cultural extravaganzaThe Bengali community in Delhi kicks off their Durgotsab celebrations with Ananda Mela, a fun fair offering a variety of traditional Bengali dishes. The food stalls at the fair include popular restaurants and street food vendors. Different puja samitis also serve bhog to thousands of people, with vegetarian and non-vegetarian options available. The organizers ensure that the women participating in the fair are not overburdened and have a happy experience. Other Durga Puja samitis in different areas of Delhi also offer a wide range of culinary delights to the visitors. Home-cooked food in jail for Jet Airways founder Naresh GoyalJet Airways founder, Naresh Goyal, who is currently in judicial custody for a money laundering case, has been granted permission by a special PMLA court to have home-cooked food in jail. The court order states that Goyal can avail home-cooked food daily at his own risk and the risk of his family or relatives until further notice. The judge also extended his remand till October 30. Rate-setters wary of spikes in food pricesThe Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) members of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) expressed concerns over inflation spiking due to price shocks, particularly in the food sector. RBI Governor Shaktikanta Das emphasized the need for a disinflationary policy, stating that the inflation outlook was uncertain, especially regarding global food and energy prices. The hawkish statements from the committee members suggest that the central bank is unlikely to ease monetary policy soon. There are indications that the RBI may control prices through liquidity management. Deputy Governor Michael Patra mentioned that consumers are not fully convinced that inflation is under control.