For vegetarians, paneer is often mentioned as the most nutritionally dense food item because it is loaded with protein, vitamins, and more, which helps meet the daily requirement of nutrients. But what would one do if the store-bought paneer turned out to be fake and adulterated? 
In the most recent case, authorities seized 1300 kg of fake paneer and, ensuring public safety, disposed of it on the spot along the Mumbai-Delhi Expressway. In May 2022, Mumbai police seized almost 2000 kg of fake paneer from two factories. 
As per reports, these fake paneers are made by mixing milk powder and water, which is further curdled with lime juice and acetic acid. To which palm oil is added to make it appear creamy and glossy. But the question of concern here is how to recognize a fake paneer at home. 
While the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) has issued a lot of tests and measures to check adulteration in milk and milk products, there are certain ways in which you can do the quality check of store-bought paneer at home as well. Take a look at the following tips and tricks:
Use your handsSimply mash some paneer using your clean and bare hands. The adulterated paneer is also made with skimmed milk, hence, it cannot bear the pressure of hands and will start falling apart when pressure is applied. 
Use iodine tinctureTo test whether the paneer is natural or artificial, one can use iodine tincture. Add water to a pan, place the paneer in it, and bring it to a boil. Let it cool down, then add a few drops of iodine tincture and see if the color changes to blue, which means the paneer is artificial.
Use arhar dalFor this test, boil paneer in some water, and after it cools down, add some tur dal powder and let it rest for 10 minutes. If the color of the paneer changes to light red, it is a sign that the paneer is made with detergent or urea. 
Taste testAlways take a small bite of paneer before you buy it, especially open counter ones. If it is chewy, it is artificial, and if it tastes very sour, then there are chances that paneer is adulterated with detergent or any other substandard product.
Use soybean powderBoil some paneer in water, let it cool down, and then add some soybean powder to it. If the color of the paneer changes to light red, it is a sign that the paneer is made with detergent or urea.
Earlier in 2021, FSSAI had shared a list of tips and tricks to do milk adulteration tests at home. According to that, to check the use of water in milk, all you have to do is put a drop of milk on a polished, slanting surface, and if the drop of milk flows slowly, leaving a white trail behind it, then it is pure. Here, milk adulterated with water will flow immediately without leaving a mark.
Health benefits of paneerPaneer is a significant source of high-quality protein, essential for muscle building, repair, and overall growth and development. With about 18 grams of protein per 100 grams, paneer is a vegetarian's top choice when it comes to protein intake. It also contains calcium and phosphorus, both crucial for maintaining strong and healthy bones, reducing the risk of osteoporosis and fracture. Due to its high protein content and low carbohydrate content, paneer can help promote muscle growth, support weight management, and improve overall health when consumed as part of a balanced diet. It provides all nine essential amino acids necessary for muscle growth and repair. While paneer is high in saturated fat, consuming it in moderation as part of a balanced diet may not adversely affect heart health and could even provide some benefits due to its protein and calcium content. The probiotics present in paneer can aid digestion by promoting the growth of beneficial gut bacteria and maintaining a healthy gut microbiome. Paneer is naturally low in carbohydrates, making it a suitable food choice for individuals following low-carb or ketogenic diets. It can help regulate blood sugar levels and promote satiety. Due to its high protein content and low carbohydrate content, paneer can help promote muscle growth, support weight management, and improve overall health when consumed as part of a balanced diet. Paneer has a low glycemic index, meaning it doesn't cause rapid spikes in blood sugar levels, making it suitable for individuals with diabetes when consumed in moderation.
Uses of PaneerPaneer is a staple ingredient in many Indian dishes, such as palak paneer (spinach and paneer curry), paneer tikka (grilled paneer skewers), paneer butter masala, and matar paneer (paneer and pea curry). Take a look at one of the easiest paneer recipes, called Masala Paneer. 
Masala PaneerTo prepare masala paneer at home, start by cutting paneer into cubes and marinating them in a mixture of yogurt, ginger-garlic paste, turmeric, chili powder, garam masala, coriander powder, and salt. Let the paneer marinate for at least 30 minutes. Heat oil in a pan, add cumin seeds, chopped onions, tomatoes, and green chilies, and sauté until soft. Add the marinated paneer cubes and cook until they are golden brown and the masala is well-coated. Garnish with chopped cilantro and serve hot with rice, roti, or naan for a flavorful Indian dish.
(Thumb and Embed Images Courtesy: istock)