Kanpur: On suspicion of adulteration, the Food Security & Drug Administration department on Wednesday raided an oil firm and seized 41 ton (480 litre of oil (rice bran oil, mustard oil and refined oil) worth Rs 40.19 lakh on suspicion of adulteration.
Vijay Pratap Singh, assistant commissioner (food) grade-2 and Dharmendra Kumar Dwivedi, chief food security officer, who had led the raiding team not only seized the oil but also collected 26 samples of other edible items and sent them to the lab for examination.
Appropriate proceedings would be initiated against the vendors on the basis of the report, said Vijay Pratap Singh.
He said the raids are being conducted to check adulteration in edible items and provide pure food items to the public in the forthcoming Deepavali and other festivals. The assistant commissioner stated that 14 ton of rice bran oil worth Rs 11,20,000 and 500 packed cartons of ten litres each worth Rs 5 lakh were seized by food officers Veeran Singh and Chitrasen. Veeran Singh also seized 20 tons of mustard oil worth Rs 21.60 lakh and two tons of refined soyabean oil worth Rs 20 lakh. Another team led by food officer Pradeep Kumar seized 69 kg of mustard oil from a firm in Jajmau. He said the other teams raided different localities of the city and collected samples of ghee, mawa, milk products (chhena rasgulla) , mixed milk, besan, besan products and a variety of sweets, cheese and namkeens.
We also published the following articles recently
Masala packets worth Rs 3 lakh seized at MargaoThe department of legal metrology in Panaji seized masala products worth Rs 3 lakh during a drive against a distributor and super stockist. The packages were found to have non-standard sizes, in violation of the Legal Metrology Act. The department has advised consumers to check for proper declarations before purchasing packaged commodities. Oil prices dip, besan & sugar costs rise as Diwali shopping takes offAs Diwali approaches, edible oil prices have decreased while the prices of foodstuffs like besan (chickpea flour) and sugar have increased. This trend has led many citizens to cut back on their grocery shopping. While the cost of besan and sugar has risen, the decrease in oil prices has somewhat balanced out the overall spending. Vendors are expecting higher sales this year compared to last year. The increase in prices is attributed to a low crop yield in Maharashtra due to a slow monsoon. Some customers are also sourcing cheaper alternatives from other locations. Indian refiners increase demand for cheaper Urals crude; reduce imports of expensive Russian grades oilIndian refiners have increased their demand for cheaper Urals crude from Russia in October, reducing imports of more expensive Russian grades. Urals crude, priced at a $10 discount compared to other grades, made up 90% of total imports from Russia in October, up from 72% in September. The availability of Urals crude at a lower price compared to ESPO and Sokol crude has led to the preference among Indian refiners. However, overall imports of Russian crude in India decreased by 4% in October. Analysts predict that Indian imports from Russia are unlikely to increase in November due to limited availability and narrow discounts.