FSSAI had recently suspended the license of a unit of KFC at the Velavan hypermarket in Thoothukudi, Tamil Nadu, after it was found that magnesium silicate synthetic, a food additive, was being used to purify used oils, which was not permissible as per FSSAI standards. Read on to find out more about it. 
According to a leading regional daily, TNIE, Food Safety Designated Officer Dr. Mariappan said, "During a surprise inspection at the KFC unit at the Velavan hypermarket, we found the use of magnesium silicate synthetic, a food additive, to purify used oils, which is not permissible as per FSSAI standards. Not only were the used oils not destroyed, but the additive was not mentioned in the ledgers.
He further added that "the officials confiscated 18 kg of synthetic magnesium silicate and 45 liters of used oil. They also seized 56 kg of chicken fried 12 hours ago. An oil sample purified by magnesium silicate synthetics and that of the chicken have been given for laboratory analysis."
Actions taken 
The inspections were conducted in the hypermarket as well as other outlets in the vicinity on allegations of the use of artificial coloring agents.
According to Mariappan, âThe food safety officials inspected various panipuri stalls in the district due to allegations of the use of artificial coloring agents. In the last two days of inspection, three samples each of the panipuri and panipuri masala were given for laboratory analysis. Further action will be taken.â
As per the official statement released by the spokesperson of KFC, it was mentioned that âKFC India is committed to following the best practices and international standards while cooking. High-quality oil and chicken are sourced from reputed suppliers in the country, and all applicable safety and quality standards laid down by the FSSAI and other relevant authorities are followed stringently."
The report further mentioned, âWe would like to clarify that the use of magnesium silicate as a clarifying agent is approved as per FSSAI, and all KFC chicken, including marinated chicken, is completely safe for consumption after cooking, as per FSSAI norms. We are actively engaging with the concerned authorities for swift and effective resolution of the issue. We assure consumers that KFC products served across the country are of the highest quality and safe for consumption,â the statement further read.
News UpdateAs per latest reports, KFC India has reopened its restaurant in Tuticorin following the Madras High Court's interim order. The primary issue at hand was the alleged use of Magnesium Silicate Synthetic, which was cited as a reason for the suspension of operation of the KFC restaurant. Vide order issued in W.P.(MD)No.16192 of 2024, the Madurai Bench of the Madras High Court has found no merit in the prohibition of edible oil reuse imposed and the court found that the prohibition against the reuse of cooking oil, cited in the present case was misapplied. The court, led by Justice G.R. Swaminathan, has issued an interim stay on the suspension of the KFC license to operate the restaurant, highlighting several procedural flaws in the enforcement action.
Easy ways to purify used oil without chemicals To purify used oil without chemicals, start by allowing the oil to cool completely. Next, pour the cooled oil through a fine mesh strainer lined with cheesecloth to remove any large particles or sediment. Then, pass the strained oil through a coffee filter or several layers of muslin cloth to further remove smaller impurities. Finally, store the purified oil in a clean, airtight container away from heat and light. This method helps extend the life of used oil for cooking while minimizing the use of additional chemicals.