Bengaluru: Around 25 quintals of rice and ragi, which were supposed to reach beneficiaries through the public distribution system (PDS), were seized while being transported in a mini-truck for sale in the black market. 
A case has been registered against the licence-holder of the ration shop from where the grains were moved out. The consignment, which was being transported in a mini-truck, was intercepted near KEB junction in Hosakerehalli. Three persons â Abu Syed, Tousif Pasha and Mohammed Firoz â were detained. 
Police alerted the food and civil supplies and consumer affairs department to inspect the ration and file a complaint. Police are on the lookout for ration shop owner Amjad Khan. A cop said a case has been registered under the Essential Commodities Act. tnn
We also published the following articles recently
Tamil Nadu: Elephants raid ration shop in CoimbatoreA female elephant and its calf from a herd of 14 wild elephants damaged a ration shop in Coimbatore, India, and ate the rice stored inside. The incident occurred in the early hours of Tuesday, with the elephants also damaging crops in the area. Forest officials were alerted and attempted to chase the elephants away, but they have since deployed two teams to monitor the herd. The mother and calf are known to raid ration shops for rice. Odd-even scheme: Private CNG cars registered in Delhi not to be exempted during rationingCNG vehicles will not be exempted from the odd-even road use arrangement in Delhi. The government believes that vehicular congestion is a major cause of pollution and reducing the number of vehicles on the road will help. Only vehicles with zero tailpipe emissions should be allowed to run. Uber, which has 70,000 cars in Delhi running on clean fuel, urged the government to consider scientific evidence and the potential negative impact of this move. Free ration, jobs & hospitals in BJP manifesto for Madhya Pradesh pollsThe BJP has released its election manifesto in Madhya Pradesh, promising to continue the PM Garib Kalyan Anna Yojana and provide pulses, mustard oil, and sugar at concessional rates. The manifesto focuses on improving health facilities, including starting medical colleges in tribal districts and AIIMS-type institutes in every division. It also promises to provide at least one job or self-employment to every family and guarantees housing for all. The BJP has pledged to spend Rs 3 lakh crore for tribal empowerment and invest in hi-tech medical facilities and hospital beds.