Patna: Over 500 kilograms of adulterated paneer have been seized by food safety and drug administration from several areas of Patna district ahead of Holi. 
The administration is keeping a strict vigil on the supply of adulterated food products, especially milk, paneer, khoya, mawa, spices, oil and sauce in the state capital.
So far, several raids have been conducted in areas like Maner, Sabalpur, Danapur, Bihta, Fatuha and Khusrupur. 
According to officials, the demand for milk products witnesses a sudden surge during Holi, so traders resort to adulteration to earn more profit.
Food safety officer (FSO) Ajay Kumar said they found adulterated paneer with less than 28% fat content, which is not in compliance with Food Safety and Standards Authority of India norm. "This is not allowed. To make paneer, 50% fat is essential. If paneer with less fat is produced, it must be packaged and sold as low-fat paneer. And, paneer cannot be made from milk powder as it will have no fat content. To compensate for this, fats like ghee or palm oil, which can be harmful for health, are added. Such paneer cannot be considered natural," the FSO said.
"The price of paneer made from milk ranges from Rs 340 to Rs 400 per kilogram in the market, while that made from milk powder is being sold at Rs 160/kg. Mawa must also be made entirely from milk. Adding potato or sweet potato for starch and mixing milk powder in mawa is not permitted," the food official said.
In case of mustard oil, usually priced at Rs 200 per litre, is being sold at Rs 140/l in the open retail market when mixed with palm oil. Ammonium nitrate, which is very harmful, is being added for adulteration, according to the FSO.
"We are also running a campaign âRuco' (re-usable cooking oil) against adulterated oil. During the campaign, the inspection team checks the quality of edible oil in the restaurants and hotels. Adulteration in mustard oil is not possible. Especially, adding chemicals is completely illegal. Many a times, mustard oil is mixed with palm oil. If palm oil is used after being heated for a long time, its quality decreases and can cause various diseases. To determine its quality, there is a machine called total polar compound measuring equipment. If its needle goes above 25 reading, it means the oil has gone bad," the FSO said.