NOIDA: Six samples of paneer collected from various restaurants in the city were found to be unsafe for consumption. A team from the food department collected 16 samples in total. While six were found to have been softened using vegetable oil, the quality of six others was found to be substandard.
These have been sent to a Lucknow laboratory for tests.
Officials stated adulterated paneer was smuggled into the city from Aligarh and was sent to Delhi via Jewar toll plaza.
âThe samples from Red Tandoor Restaurant and Lakshmi Dairy in Sector 62 failed to meet the safety standards. A sample taken from a vehicle going to Delhi from Aligarh was also unsafe. Likewise, samples taken from Shiv Dairy in Bhangel Road, Paras Brand Paneer in Kasna, and Midas HyperMarket India in Sector 75 did not meet the standards due to lower amount of fat,â said the official from the food department
âThe cost of paneer is between Rs 320 to Rs 350 a kg. However, adulterated paneer is sold at Rs 180-250 a kg. Unaware of its health implications, people buy adulterated paneer because it costs less,â said Archana Dheeran, designated officer of the Food Safety and Drug Administration (FSA) department.
Unable to meet the demand with local resources, shop owners and traders often bring paneer from Ghazipur Mandi in Delhi. However, many of them source adulterated paneer to make higher profits.
After several allegations that milk fat was replaced in part or full with vegetable oils in paneer, the food department looked into the matter, an official said.
A case has been filed in the ADM court, and a campaign will be launched to teach people how to identify adulterated food such as paneer, the official added.
We also published the following articles recently
Unit making adulterated ginger-garlic mix bustedSOT sleuths seized adulterated ginger and garlic paste from Katedan. Ahmed, detained for using chemicals despite expired licence. Paste sold under various brands in Hyderabad. Massive quantities seized by police for further action.