Hyderabad: After a series of raids on restaurants and popular hotels in the last few days, food safety officials have now turned their attention to hostels, PGs, and homestays. These inspections have revealed pest-infested vegetables and unhygienic kitchen conditions at hostels, which cater to a large number of students and working professionals.
During the inspections at Sri Lakshmi PG hostel in Madhapur, authorities found pest-infested vegetables, such as cauliflower and lady finger. 
The kitchen was found be in an unsanitary state, with a rusted dosa pan and improperly stored essentials like rice, dal, chilli powder, and Bengal gram. Samples were collected due to suspicions of adulteration. Similarly, at VG Homestay in Madhapur, officials seized food colours and a rusted dosa tawa. Both establishments were operating without the required FSSAI license, which is mandatory for food businesses in India.
âHostels are being instructed on the importance of maintaining strict hygiene standards in all food preparation and storage areas. We have urged the management of hostels and PGs to take immediate action to address the issues identified during the raids and ensure that their premises meet the required health and safety regulations,â said a senior official.
On the other hand, students and employees are calling on food safety authorities to inspect their hostels due to concerns about the poor quality of the meals.
âThere are suspicions that the lentils and essential ingredients such as chili powder and cooking oil might be contaminated or adulterated. Furthermore, the wheat flour used in the preparation of chapathis, which are a staple in our daily diet, has an unpleasant taste. We need immediate action from the officials to ensure that the food being served is safe, hygienic, and of acceptable quality in hostels,â said Ch Manoj Kumar, who stays at a PG in Ameerpet.
Meanwhile, the lack of proper organisation among hostels has posed a setback for officials. They estimate that there are 1,000 recognised hostels. However, a large number of them are operating within residential buildings. These establishments often lack name boards and fail to meet the necessary requirements for running such facilities.
We also published the following articles recently