Paneer is a rich source of protein and other nutrients. Unfortunately, this nutritious food is often making news due to the on-going adulteration in the market. In a major crackdown in Chandigarh, health department officials have seized around 450 kg of paneer and other dairy products from a shop and a vehicle. Scroll down to read the details. 
According to a 
TOI report, the food safety administration of the Chandigarh health department conducted a raid in Bapudham Colony, Sector 26 and seized around 450 kg of paneer and other dairy products including ghee and dahi from a shop and a vehicle.
As per the report, the seized samples have been sent to a food safety analyst laboratory authorised by the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI). Also, two challans were issued under Section 63 of the Food Safety & Standards Act, 2006.
According to the designated officer-cum-licensing authority for food safety, customers should be vigilant while buying paneer from the market. He cautioned consumers against being misled by unusually low prices. As per the report, the cost of paneer cannot be as low as Rs 250 per kg, as it takes about 3 litres of milk with sufficient fat content to produce 1 kg of paneer. 
The processing cost alone would exceed Rs 300, the official explained in the report.
Paneer is high in protein, which is essential for muscle growth, repair, and overall body strengthâespecially great for vegetarians. It is also rich in calcium, that supports strong bones and teeth, and helps prevent osteoporosis.
And the high protein and healthy fats found in paneer is said to keep you full for longer, reducing unwanted snacking.
As per reports, fake paneer is often made by mixing milk powder and water, which is further curdled with lime juice and acetic acid. To which palm oil is added to make it appear creamy and glossy. But the question of concern here is how to recognize a fake paneer at home.
While the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) has issued a lot of tests and measures to check adulteration in milk and milk products, there are certain ways in which you can do the quality check of store-bought paneer at home as well. Take a look at the following tips and tricks:
Try the hand testTake a small amount of paneer and mash it using clean hands. Pure, unadulterated paneer will hold its texture, while adulterated paneerâoften made from skimmed milkâwill crumble or break apart under slight pressure.
Use iodine tinctureTo test whether the paneer is natural or artificial, one can use iodine tincture. Add water to a pan, place the paneer in it, and bring it to a boil. Let it cool down, then add a few drops of iodine tincture and see if the color changes to blue, which means the paneer is artificial.
Use arhar dalFor this test, boil paneer in some water, and after it cools down, add some tur dal powder and let it rest for 10 minutes. If the color of the paneer changes to light red, it is a sign that the paneer is made with detergent or urea.
Use soybean powderBoil some paneer in water, let it cool down, and then add some soybean powder to it. If the color of the paneer changes to light red, it is a sign that the paneer is made with detergent or urea.
Taste testAlways take a small bite of paneer before you buy it, especially open counter ones. If it is chewy, it is artificial, and if it tastes very sour, then there are chances that paneer is adulterated with detergent or any other substandard product.
Thumb and Embed Images Courtesy: istock