Bhopal: As the festival of Diwali draws closer, fake mawa seems to have started arriving in the city from the Agra-Chambal belt. On Thursday, Bajaria police seized 10 quintals of mawa at Bhopal railway station in the morning. It was being transported in a truck with registration number MP-04-LD-7711, after being delivered by train. The police stopped the vehicle, and officials from the food safety department took samples of the mawa for testing.
District food safety officer Devendra Dubey told TOI that the mawa was booked from Agra, and they are trying to find out from the railways who booked the mawa for Bhopal. "We don't know the person who booked the mawa, nor do we know the person who was to take the delivery. We only have the driver of the vehicle, and he may not know much about the person who booked the mawa or the one who was to take the delivery. We have taken samples of the mawa and sent them for testing. The mawa will remain in the truck until we receive a request from someone that it should be safely placed in cold storage," he said.
On Oct 11, Koh-e-fiza police intercepted a car carrying 1.5 quintals of paneer. The paneer was being transported to Ashok Nagar from Sehore. It was sent from Sehore by Amjad for delivery at Ashok Nagar. After being informed, food safety officials reached the spot, and since there was no one else available in the car, the car driver, Yakoob Shah, was asked to give samples of paneer for testing at the lab.
Following a tip-off, the Hanumanganj police on Oct 12 seized 1.5 quintals of paneer from an Ambassador car at Bhopal bus stand. Brought from a dairy in Sehore, the paneer seized was found to be "cheese analogue" (a commodity that looks like cheese). One quintal of the commodity was to be sold in Bhopal and 50 kg in Vidisha.
The police, which have a greater network of informers, seem to be helping the food safety officials a good deal to stop the entry of fake or adulterated mawa and other milk products. However, teams of food safety officials are also busy taking samples of sweets, namkeen, and other milk products from sweets and namkeen shops all over the city.
Senior food safety official posted at the headquarters of the food safety office in Bhopal, D K Verma, while talking to TOI, said, "We are on alert. Our campaign against the supply of adulterated edible goods was already continuing. In the wake of the festival season, we have sought help from the police, and we are also taking help from informers this time. Vigil on the borders is being maintained to check the quality of goods like mawa and paneer being brought into the city or being sent outside. We have also sought help from the general public on social media; they can inform us if they find the quality of anything sold to them suspect."
Verma said that there is an obvious reason to suspect that the quality of milk-made products is compromised during the festival season as demands for mawa, sweets, and paneer shoot up, but the supply of milk remains the same. "They may not always sell goods adulterated to an extent that your health is affected, but the use of milk powder or edible oil for manufacturing paneer or anything else can't be ruled out. It may not make you ill, but you don't get the nutrients or taste that you should. Some traders also eye greater profit and collude in the sale of spurious goods," he said.
When asked what precautions people should take while buying sweets, namkeen, paneer, or other such items, he said, "They should first see to it that the shop they are buying these goods from has the Food Safety & Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) registration. It should be on the counter of the shop itself. If they are buying packed namkeen or sweets, they should look for the FSSAI licence number, date of manufacturing, and the date before it's recommended to be used." 
Verma further said that people should avoid buying âcoloured' sweets, and if they are buying sweets with silver work on it, the silver work would disappear if they press the sweet, but if it's aluminium, it would get stuck on their fingers. They should only buy sweets where they are kept properly covered and not laid out on tables on the footpath, as we often see during Diwali, even if they are covered with nets because dust will still get into it. As far as testing the purity of mawa and paneer is concerned, it's difficult, but if you put mawa under your tongue, it tends to stick if it's impure and things like starch or edible oil have been used to make it. For paneer, if you mash it, it would start falling apart if milk powder has been used to prepare it.
District food safety officer Devendra Dubey also said that it's difficult for someone who doesn't eat mawa or paneer very much to find out whether it's pure or not. "I can tell you about mawa because I ate mawa quite a lot when I was young. I would know by taste whether mawa is pure or not, but not about paneer because it was not used in the kitchen of our family that much. Besides, the mawa we used to eat was red mawa and not the white mawa which comes to urban areas like Bhopal. It's prepared in boilers, and its texture changes entirely, but one thing I can say is that if the mawa is completely dry, it is likely to be impure. Mawa, because of the presence of fat, has moisture, and it can't be completely dry, and it should not fall apart when pressed."