Nagpur: A Food and Drug Administration (FDA) team from Mumbai conducted surprise raids at the godowns of Nagpur-based betel nut traders on Monday. 
Betel nuts worth more than Rs 3 crore were seized from five firms for suspected adulteration. The Mumbai teams were joined by the local FDA sleuths in raiding the betel nut traders, many of who have earlier being accused of tax and duty evasions.
The FDA teams raided a cold storage in Leegaon and another manufacturing unit in Kalamna on suspicion of use of substandard quality materials.
Notably, the betel nut industry in Nagpur is worth crores of rupees and is considered a trade hub in Central India.
Assistant commissioner (Vigilance) AS Mahajan said the raids were conducted at a manufacturing unit known as Priti Industries in Kalamna and four firms at Farmico cold storage at Leegaon. 
âWe seized 11,727 kg betel nuts at Kalamna which has a market value of more than Rs 56.19 lakh,â said Mahajan. Two separate teams comprised food safety officers Yaduraj Dahatonde, Sandeep Suryavanshi, Rajesh Yadav, PC Manvatkar, LP Soyyam, AY Sontakke and SV Babre.
Mahajan said consignments of four firms worth around Rs 2.60 crore were seized from Farmico cold storage. âThe seizures were conducted on suspicion of use of substandard material. The samples will be sent to government labs for examination,â said Mahajan, adding that the raid was directed by FDA Minister Dharmaraobaba Atram.
FDA has repeatedly received complaints of Nagpur traders mixing palm seeds with betel nuts to lower price in the already competitive market. The market is now abuzz with the rift between traders divided over mixing palm seeds in the betel nut. 
âThe FDA has been directed to conduct frequent raids by its commissioner Abhimanyu Kale,â said Mahajan.
We also published the following articles recently
Betel leaf, kewda farmers to get govt aidThe state government of Odisha has announced financial assistance for farmers cultivating betel leaves and kewda flowers. Farmers will receive Rs 2,500 per unit for maintaining betel vines and can access interest-free crop loans up to Rs 1 lakh. The government will also conduct scientific mapping of kewda fields to promote cultivation. Guidelines will be framed by the agriculture and farmers empowerment department. In another development, bamboo cultivation in Gujarat has doubled, benefiting more farmers, while Karnataka is facing crop failures due to rainfall deficit and high temperatures. In Maharashtra, proxy indicators were used to provide mid-season adversity compensation to soybean growers. FDA: 1% milk supply is substandardDuring a surprise inspection by the state Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in Mumbai, it was found that 1% of the milk supply was of substandard quality. 346 samples were collected, out of which three were adulterated. 23 liters of milk was destroyed and 1,900 liters of low-quality milk was returned. The FDA raid is part of pre-festival checks carried out annually. The FDA also obtained food samples from a renowned eatery in south Mumbai for quality check. FDA seizes food stuff from Guj busesThe district unit of Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) in Nashik seized food packets worth Rs2.1 lakh, which were made from edible oil and used in preparing sweets resembling milk-based ones. The products were transported illegally in unhygienic conditions. The FDA is taking steps to ensure quality food, especially sweets, during the festive season. The seized products were found in tourist vehicles arriving from Gujarat. The FDA seized 754 kg of products packed in bags and stuffed in the luggage carrier of the buses.