NOIDA: A Greater Noida resident claimed a block of paneer he bought from a local store was laced with vegetable oil â a commonly used as adulterant to keep cottage cheese soft for long. 
Gaurav Kumar Yadav, a resident of Stellar Jeevan Apartments in Greater Noida West, said that when he went to chop the paneer he had just bought, he found his hands covered in oil.
He claimed it was the first time that he had purchased paneer from the store near his housing complex.
He claimed the manufacturer is based in Agra.
âMost of the societyâs residents purchase paneer from there. Several local restaurants also purchase paneer from the store and we may have been consuming the adulterated product for long,â he said. Yadav also posted a video of the adulterated paneer on X, which was shared several times on the social media platform on Tuesday. 
âI came to know that this paneer was manufactured in Agra. Later, when I called the spokesperson he denied all the allegations and, on top of it, claimed that I had mixed vegetable oil in it,â he said.
Officials from the food safety department took cognizance of the video and began an investigation. âWe sent a team to take the samples which will be sent for lab tests,â assistant commissioner of the food safety department Sarvesh Mishra said. This is not the first time adulterated food products have entered the markets. In March, six samples of paneer were found to be unsafe for consumption. As per reports, the unadulterated paneer was made by mixing milk powder and water, which is further curdled with lime juice and acetic acid. Then, vegetable oil was added to make it appear creamy and glossy. 
We also published the following articles recently
Dairy farmers dispute reports of milk adulterationThe Progressive Dairy Farmers Association (PDFA) dismissed social media accusations of milk adulteration affecting consumer health. PDFA President Daljit Singh emphasized the necessity of government checks to ensure milk purity. He highlighted Punjab's milk production statistics and suggested the scare was a conspiracy to undermine milk producers, while genuine issues like adulterated paneer go unaddressed. How is olive oil different from mustard oil?Mustard oil, derived from mustard seeds, has been a staple in Indian cuisine, known for its strong flavor and high smoke point. Recently, olive oil, with its health benefits and Mediterranean origins, has gained popularity. While olive oil is praised for heart health, mustard oil has antimicrobial properties. Is your tea adulterated? How to check the purity of tea leaves?Government officials in Cuttack, Odisha, recently uncovered a fake tea powder manufacturing unit, highlighting rising concerns about food adulteration. Huge quantities of adulterated tea and packaging materials were found during a raid. The article offers tips on checking tea purity at home through appearance, aroma, taste, and solubility tests to help consumers ensure quality and safety.