In a major crackdown on adulterated food items, the Food Safety Department on Friday seized around 1,401 kilograms of suspected adulterated paneer in Surat district of Gujarat.
The food manufacturing facility was operating without an FSSAI licence. Samples of paneer have been sent for testing to ensure consumer safety, the FSSAI said in a social media post on X.
Of late, cases of food adulteration are becoming widespread and, in some cases, increasingly sophisticated, posing a danger to public health.
Last month, the Uttar Pradesh Food Safety and Drug Administration (FSDA) confiscated 416,494 litres of cooking oil of questionable or inferior grade, valued to be worth nearly ₹6.43 crore, reported news agency PTI.
The agency stated that 58 cross-district units were organised and stationed on the ground and 64 edible oil production sites were audited.
"Eight units were found closed during the inspection, while 56 units were found operational, against which enforcement action was taken," the department said.
As many as 206 samples of edible oil were collected for testing, it added.
On 25 February, the FSDA squad seized and destroyed 900 kg of tainted khoya (condensed milk) at Panki Railway Station in Kanpur district. The khoya, delivered by rail, was discovered to be in extremely unhygienic conditions. The seized spoiled khoya was discarded at the refuse processing facility in the Govindnagar area of Kanpur.
The FSSAI had confiscated counterfeit paneer near Noida, together with 1,400 kg of imitation khoya in Jhansi, and 400kg of outdated ghee.
On 27 February, the FSSAI posted a video clip on Instagram showing authorities discarding a significant volume of substandard paneer at a dumping ground.
It mentioned that the shipment was stopped late at night at Jewar Toll Plaza on the Yamuna Expressway.
Recently, FSSAI CEO Rajit Punhani asked states and Union Territories to markedly bolster local monitoring frameworks, with a heavy emphasis on high-risk food groups, during the 49th assembly of the Central Advisory Committee, conducted in Gangtok, Sikkim.
Punhani highlighted the requirement for risk-centred audits and continuous monitoring campaigns for high-risk materials such as dairy and milk items, cooking oils, condiments, and honey.
According to an official statement, Punhani demanded firm and transparent measures against non-adherent food business operators, instructing states/UTs to perform specialised policing initiatives and frequently provide reports on steps taken. He also stressed that steady regulation and active general publication of results are vital to discouraging infractions and bolstering buyer trust.
The CEO additionally emphasised the necessity of expanding the food security staff at the state/UT level.
For about a decade, Livemint—News Desk has been a credible source for authentic and timely news, and well-researched analysis on national news, business, personal finance, corporates, politics and geopolitics. We bring the latest updates on all the listed companies on BSE and NSE, startups, mutual funds, Union ministries, geopolitics, and untapped human interest stories from around the world, helping our readers to stay informed on the latest developments around the globe. Our Coverage Areas 1. Companies: Comprehensive news and analysis on listed and unlisted companies, corporate announcements, corporate chatter, C-suite, business trends, hiring alerts, layoffs, work-life balance, world's top billionaires and richest and more. 2. Personal finance: Insights into mutual funds, small savings schemes like - PPF, SSY, post office savings scheme, stock to watch, personal loans, credit cards, top bank FDs, real estate, income tax and more. 3. Politics: Comprehensive coverage of general elections, state elections and bypolls, Lok Sabha, Vidhan Sabha, Parliament, PMO, PIB, finance ministry, home ministry, among other union ministries and government departments. 4. National News: From metro cities like Delhi, Mumbai, and e to untapped stories from rural India, we cover human interest, health, education, crime and courts, and law and order, among other areas of public interest. 5. Economy: In-depth analysis of India's macro and micro-economic indicators like- GDP, inflation, forex, fiscal deficit, current account deficit, interest rate cycle, economic recovery, RBI circulars, indirect taxes, GST, Insolvency and Bankruptcy imports, exports and everything that impacts Indian economy. 6. Geopolitics: Well-rounded and deeply researched coverage on US News, Oval Office European Union, Ukraine Russia War, middle-east crisis, royal families and global leaders like - Donald Trump, Vladimir Putin, Kim Jong Un, Xi Jinping and premiers of other leading economies in the world. Meet the Team 1. Gulam Jeelani, Political Affairs Editor 2. Sugam Singhal, Senior Assistant Editor 3. Chanchal, Assistant Editor 4. Sanchari Ghosh, Chief Content Producer 5. Pratik Prashant Mukane, Chief Content Producer 6. Sayantani Biswas, Chief Content Producer 7. Ravi Hari, Deputy Chief Content Producer 8. Garvit Bhirani, Deputy Chief Content Producer 9. Akriti Anand, Senior Content Producer 10. Jocelyn Felix Fernandes, Senior Content Producer 11. Swastika Das Sharma, Content Producer 12. Mausam Jha, Content Producer 13. Riya R Alex, Trainee Content Producer