1:"$Sreact.fragment"
2:I[71246,["/FoodComputing/_next/static/chunks/11ajig91nhgba.js","/FoodComputing/_next/static/chunks/1-8s9_t85wwr4.js","/FoodComputing/_next/static/chunks/228e16--yt-ge.js","/FoodComputing/_next/static/chunks/0p_14p4t4moso.js"],"TaxonomyTree"]
222:I[97367,["/FoodComputing/_next/static/chunks/11ajig91nhgba.js","/FoodComputing/_next/static/chunks/1-8s9_t85wwr4.js","/FoodComputing/_next/static/chunks/228e16--yt-ge.js"],"OutletBoundary"]
223:"$Sreact.suspense"
3:T56d,Unsafe cooking oil, pungent smell found at KFC in Hyderabad siasat.com Hyderabad: A food safety inspection at a Hyderabad KFC outlet in Nizampet on Saturday, June 20, uncovered several food safety violations, like unsafe cooking oil, a pungent smell in the kitchen and raw chicken stored without labelling.
Officials also noted that food items lacked preparation and had improper labels; vegetarian and non-vegetarian items were stored without proper segregation; and the marination and frying sections required improved housekeeping.
Temperature monitoring records for chillers and freezers were not available.
On the positive side, food handlers were wearing hairnets, gloves and aprons, and no pest infestation was found at the establishment. Medical fitness, pest control, and water testing records were available.
An improvement notice has been issued to the establishment by Cyberabad Municipal Corporation, and staff have been asked to strengthen food storage, labelling, segregation, oil monitoring, and record maintenance practices. cooking oil unsafe_food substandard improvement notice alleged Hyderabad, Telangana, India improvement notice fflo:issuedBy Cyberabad Municipal Corporation An improvement notice has been issued to the establishment by Cyberabad Municipal Corporation raw chicken stored without labelling fflo:foundAtStep Retail raw chicken stored without labelling4:T956,Hyderabad: Kondapur biryani outlet scores 92 pc in food safety siasat.com Hyderabad: Cyberabad Municipal Corporation’s (CMC) Food Safety team inspected Sattibabu Biryani near KIMS in Kondapur on Friday, June 19, as part of its ongoing food safety inspection drive across Cyberabad, with the outlet scoring 84 out of 92 marks, or 92 percent.
The inspection found several good practices in place at the outlet. Food handlers were observed wearing hairnets, gloves and aprons, while expiry and use-by dates were properly maintained. The establishment had medical fitness certificates, pest control records and water testing reports available for inspection. FOSTAC-certified Food Safety Supervisors were deployed on site.
Inspectors also noted proper segregation of vegetarian and non-vegetarian items, with fly catchers installed and meat found to be properly cleaned, wrapped, and stored. Vendor licenses for food materials were maintained as required.
However, the team flagged two issues during the visit. Flies were noticed near food items because lids were not kept closed at the time of inspection, and the ghee sourced by the outlet did not carry proper labelling.
CMC officials issued instructions to keep food items covered at all times and directed the outlet to procure and maintain properly labelled food products going forward.
The inspection is part of CMC’s continuing food safety monitoring drive across Cyberabad, which has in recent days flagged violations at other Kondapur-area outlets, including a Subway branch where rotten lettuce and unlabelled vegetables were found, and Spice Kitchen in PNR Empire, where inspectors found a cockroach infestation. ghee unsafe_food instruction to procure labelled products alleged Hyderabad, Telangana, India instruction to procure labelled products fflo:issuedBy CMC CMC officials issued instructions to keep food items covered at all times and directed the outlet to procure and maintain properly labelled food products going forward. instruction to keep food covered fflo:issuedBy Cyberabad Municipal Corporation CMC officials issued instructions to keep food items covered Subway inspection finding fflo:identifies rotten lettuce Subway branch where rotten lettuce and unlabelled vegetables were found Spice Kitchen fflo:foundAt cockroach infestation Spice Kitchen in PNR Empire, where inspectors found a cockroach infestation5:T694,Food safety teams find hygiene and food safety violations at Sattibabu Biryani, 7 Sisters in Hyderabad thehindu.com The food safety teams of the Cyberabad Municipal Corporation (CMC) conducted inspections at Sattibabu Biryani in Kondapur and 7 Sisters in Hitex on Saturday, June 20 and detected multiple hygiene and food safety violations.
At Sattibabu Biryani, officials found flies near food items as some containers had been left uncovered during the inspection. The teams also observed that the ghee procured by the establishment did not carry proper labelling. Following the inspection, officials instructed the management to ensure that food items are kept covered at all times to prevent contamination and directed the establishment to procure and maintain properly labelled food products in compliance with food safety norms.
At 7 Sisters, the inspection revealed multiple lapses, including the failure to discard prepared food items within the prescribed use-by period and the absence of proper labelling on meat products. Food items were found kept uncovered near drain areas, while broken tiles and slippery flooring were noticed in the kitchen. Officials also observed that hot water sanitation practices were not being followed. In the store room, lizard droppings were found, indicating inadequate cleaning of shelves.
Published - June 20, 2026 04:52 pm IST ghee mislabeling unsafe_food instruction_to_correct alleged Hyderabad, Cyberabad, Telangana, India lizard droppings fflo:foundAt store room In the store room, lizard droppings were found Hygiene and food safety violations at 7 Sisters fflo:foundAtStep Retail At 7 Sisters, the inspection revealed multiple lapses6:T7a9,Daltonganj police seize spurious edible oil | Ranchi News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Daltonganj: A network involved in selling spurious edible oil of a popular brand was busted and 138 boxes, containing 1,776 litres, seized from a godown near Bairya Chowk late Wednesday night, police said.
Sources also said the oil manufacturing company authorities noticed a sharp decline in sales. An internal probe indicated possible trade malpractice. Hence, they sought police assistance.
Sadar SDPO Rajesh Yadav said, âActing on a written complaint filed by the companyâs legal agency, a case was registered with the Daltonganj town police against the wholesale dealer under provisions of the Trade Act, the Copyright Act and the BNS.â
âSamples would be sent to the state food and drug testing laboratory in Ranchi for analysis. We are also investigating the retail outlets,â he added.
Food safety personnel said a simple household check, called the âfreeze testâ is helpful to understand the quality of the oil. If the oil solidifies in a refrigerator, it may indicate contamination or adulteration. Edible Oils counterfeit substandard case registration seizure suspected Daltonganj, Jharkhand, India spurious edible oil fflo:belongsToCategory Edible Oils spurious edible oil spurious edible oil sale prov:wasAssociatedWith wholesale dealer case was registered with the Daltonganj town police against the wholesale dealer seizure of spurious edible oil fflo:foundAtStep godown near Bairya Chowk seized from a godown near Bairya Chowk freeze test fflo:producesIndicator solidification in refrigerator If the oil solidifies in a refrigerator, it may indicate contamination freeze test fflo:producesIndicator solidifies in a refrigerator If the oil solidifies in a refrigerator, it may indicate contamination or adulteration case registration against wholesale dealer fflo:issuedBy Daltonganj town police case was registered with the Daltonganj town police7:T1198,6,500 litres of adulterated ghee, raw material seized during raids in Delhi, Haryana thehansindia.com New Delhi:  In a major crackdown on a food adulteration network, the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) seized more than 6,500 litres of adulterated ghee and related raw materials during a series of enforcement operations across Delhi and Haryana.   
The FSSAI inspectors raided and busted two ‘desi ghee’ manufacturing units -- one in Delhi’s Dwarka and another in Haryana’s Sonipat -- recovering more than 2,500 and 4,000 litres of spurious ghee from the two locations, respectively. The entire stock of ghee was ready for market distribution and was busted in the nick of time by the officials.  
The FSSAI officials worked in close coordination with local police authorities and Central Food Safety officers to dismantle the inter-state supply chain, involved in the manufacture and distribution of the suspected counterfeit ghee.  
In Delhi, FSSAI officials uncovered mass-scale adulteration during its raids at a clandestine facility in Dwarka’s Dhulsiras village. An estimated 1,020 litres of unidentified oil, suspected to be used as raw material in the production of counterfeit ghee and 1,500 litres of suspected adulterated ghee were located and seized.  
In Haryana, the food officials came across an even bigger illegal facility involved in making counterfeit ghee. More than 4,000 litres of suspected adulterated ghee packaged for market distribution were seized from M/S Bala Ji Food Products, Plot No. 29A, Sector 53, Phase V in Sonipat.  
All seized materials were secured under the regulatory custody of the Food Business Operators (FBOs), and an FIR was registered against the miscreants for required legal action.  
How the spurious ghee network was busted  
The investigation into large-scale illegal ghee manufacturing began after the FSSAI identified digital and print advertisements promoting premium cow ghee and regular ghee. The company advertisements, however, lacked mandatory FSSAI licence details and labelling information, prompting the officials to smell a rat and initiate a probe.  
The CFSOs initiated a decoy operation, posing as consumers to contact the seller through the advertised mobile number and procure samples of the products.  
The collected samples were sent under a prescribed chain of custody to the NABL-accredited laboratory for detailed analysis. The findings revealed that the samples did not conform to the standards prescribed for ghee and contained a mixture of vegetable oils and other non-dairy constituents.  
Based on the findings, the FSSAI intelligence teams mapped the illicit network engaged in manufacturing, storage and distribution of adulterated ghee. A coordinated operation was conducted on Wednesday at multiple locations across Delhi and Haryana, thereby resulting in recovery of more than 6,500 litres of spurious ghee and associated raw materials. ghee adulteration counterfeit unidentified oil seizure FIR registration suspected Dwarka, South West Delhi, Delhi, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant unidentified oil unidentified oil, suspected to be used as raw material in the production of counterfeit ghee adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt Distribution The entire stock of ghee was ready for market distribution seizure of adulterated ghee fflo:inRegion Haryana enforcement operations across Delhi and Haryana unidentified oil fflo:foundAt Processing unidentified oil, suspected to be used as raw material in the production of counterfeit ghee ghee adulteration at Sonipat prov:used ghee facility involved in making counterfeit ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable oils contained a mixture of vegetable oils and other non-dairy constituents ghee fflo:hasAdulterant non-dairy constituents contained a mixture of vegetable oils and other non-dairy constituents vegetable oils fflo:foundAt Distribution packaged for market distribution were seized ghee adulteration at Sonipat fflo:hasFraudType Substitution contained a mixture of vegetable oils and other non-dairy constituents ghee adulteration finding fflo:triggeredAction FIR registration an FIR was registered against the miscreants ghee adulteration finding fflo:triggeredAction seizure of materials More than 4,000 litres of suspected adulterated ghee packaged for market distribution were seized ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable oils contained a mixture of vegetable oils ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable oils contained a mixture of vegetable oils8:T11a8,6,500 litres of fake ghee recovered in Delhi, Haryana assamtribune.com New Delhi, June 18: In a major crackdown on a food adulteration network, the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) seized more than 6,500 litres of adulterated ghee and related raw materials during a series of enforcement operations across Delhi and Haryana.
The FSSAI inspectors raided and busted two ‘desi ghee’ manufacturing units -- one in Delhi’s Dwarka and another in Haryana’s Sonipat -- recovering more than 2,500 and 4,000 litres of spurious ghee from the two locations, respectively. The entire stock of ghee was ready for market distribution and was busted in the nick of time by the officials.
The FSSAI officials worked in close coordination with local police authorities and Central Food Safety officers to dismantle the inter-state supply chain, involved in the manufacture and distribution of the suspected counterfeit ghee.
In Delhi, FSSAI officials uncovered mass-scale adulteration during its raids at a clandestine facility in Dwarka’s Dhulsiras village. An estimated 1,020 litres of unidentified oil, suspected to be used as raw material in the production of counterfeit ghee and 1,500 litres of suspected adulterated ghee were located and seized.
In Haryana, the food officials came across an even bigger illegal facility involved in making counterfeit ghee. More than 4,000 litres of suspected adulterated ghee packaged for market distribution were seized from M/S Bala Ji Food Products, Plot No. 29A, Sector 53, Phase V in Sonipat.
All seized materials were secured under the regulatory custody of the Food Business Operators (FBOs), and an FIR was registered against the miscreants for required legal action.
How the spurious ghee network was busted
The investigation into large-scale illegal ghee manufacturing began after the FSSAI identified digital and print advertisements promoting premium cow ghee and regular ghee. The company advertisements, however, lacked mandatory FSSAI licence details and labelling information, prompting the officials to smell a rat and initiate a probe.
The CFSOs initiated a decoy operation, posing as consumers to contact the seller through the advertised mobile number and procure samples of the products.
The collected samples were sent under a prescribed chain of custody to the NABL-accredited laboratory for detailed analysis. The findings revealed that the samples did not conform to the standards prescribed for ghee and contained a mixture of vegetable oils and other non-dairy constituents.
Based on the findings, the FSSAI intelligence teams mapped the illicit network engaged in manufacturing, storage and distribution of adulterated ghee. A coordinated operation was conducted on Wednesday at multiple locations across Delhi and Haryana, thereby resulting in recovery of more than 6,500 litres of spurious ghee and associated raw materials.
--IANS ghee adulteration counterfeit unidentified oil seizure FIR registration suspected Dwarka, South West Delhi, Delhi, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant unidentified oil 1,020 litres of unidentified oil, suspected to be used as raw material in the production of counterfeit ghee unidentified oil fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee unidentified oil, suspected to be used as raw material in the production of counterfeit ghee Ghee Adulteration Crackdown prov:used ghee seized more than 6,500 litres of adulterated ghee ghee adulteration at Sonipat prov:used ghee facility involved in making counterfeit ghee non-dairy constituents prov:wasGeneratedBy illegal ghee manufacturing contained a mixture of vegetable oils and other non-dairy constituents ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable oils contained a mixture of vegetable oils ghee fflo:hasAdulterant non-dairy constituents contained a mixture of vegetable oils and other non-dairy constituents vegetable oils fflo:foundAt Distribution packaged for market distribution were seized ghee adulteration at Sonipat fflo:hasFraudType Substitution contained a mixture of vegetable oils and other non-dairy constituents ghee adulteration finding fflo:triggeredAction FIR registration an FIR was registered against the miscreants ghee adulteration finding fflo:triggeredAction seizure of materials More than 4,000 litres of suspected adulterated ghee packaged for market distribution were seized ghee adulteration finding fflo:producedBy NABL-accredited laboratory analysis samples were sent under a prescribed chain of custody to the NABL-accredited laboratory for detailed analysis9:T114f,FSSAI seizes over 6,500 litres of suspected adulterated ghee in Delhi, Haryana operations mumbainews.net New Delhi [India], June 18 (ANI): The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) has dismantled an alleged inter-state network involved in the manufacture and distribution of suspected counterfeit ghee, seizing more than 6,500 litres of suspected adulterated products and related raw materials during coordinated operations in Delhi and Haryana.
The action was carried out by Central Food Safety Officers (CFSOs) under the guidance of Devesh Kumar Mahla, IPS, Director, Northern Regional Office (NRO), FSSAI, in coordination with local police authorities.
Speaking about the operation, Mahla said, 'We have seized around 6500 liter of adulterated ghee. It was manufactured with vegetable and animal fat as per the lab report. It was a good operation with FSSAI making decoy and organised surveillance and action.'
According to FSSAI, the investigation began after officials identified digital and print advertisements promoting premium cow ghee and regular ghee without mandatory FSSAI licence details and prescribed labelling information.
Officials subsequently conducted a decoy operation, posing as consumers to procure samples of the products. The samples were immediately sent to an FSSAI-recognised NABL-accredited laboratory for detailed analysis.
According to the laboratory findings, the samples did not conform to standards prescribed for ghee under the Food Safety and Standards Regulations and were found to contain a mixture of vegetable oils and other non-dairy constituents.
Based on the findings, FSSAI teams traced the alleged manufacturing, storage and distribution network and carried out enforcement operations on June 17 at multiple locations in Delhi and Haryana.
In Delhi, officials raided a facility at Village Dhulsiras in Dwarka linked to Parit Ram and recovered around 1,020 litres of unidentified oil suspected to be used as raw material in the production of counterfeit ghee, along with approximately 1,500 litres of suspected adulterated ghee. The stock was seized and placed under regulatory custody.
In Haryana, officials conducted an operation at M/S Bala Ji Food Products in Sonipat and seized more than 4,000 litres of suspected adulterated ghee that had been packaged for market distribution.
FSSAI said a formal complaint has been lodged with local police authorities, and an FIR has been registered against the miscreants. The seized materials have been secured under regulatory custody, while statutory enforcement samples have been drawn for further analysis.
The food regulator said further investigations are underway to identify additional entities allegedly linked to the network and reiterated its zero-tolerance approach towards food adulteration and misbranding.
Further, consumers are advised to remain vigilant while purchasing food products and to verify FSSAI licence or registration number, proper labelling information, manufacturer details, packaging integrity and unusually low prices that may indicate counterfeit products. (ANI) ghee adulteration mislabeling vegetable oils seizure raid FIR registered suspected Delhi, Dwarka, India detailed analysis fso:isPerformedAt NABL-accredited laboratory sent to an FSSAI-recognised NABL-accredited laboratory for detailed analysis ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable oils the samples did not conform to standards prescribed for ghee under the Food Safety and Standards Regulations and were found to contain a mixture of vegetable oils ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable fat manufactured with vegetable and animal fat as per the lab report ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat manufactured with vegetable and animal fat as per the lab report suspected adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt Delhi and Haryana seizing more than 6,500 litres of suspected adulterated products and related raw materials during coordinated operations in Delhi and Haryana ghee adulteration method fflo:hasFraudType Substitution manufactured with vegetable and animal fat ghee adulteration method fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling promoting premium cow ghee and regular ghee without mandatory FSSAI licence details and prescribed labelling information ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable oils found to contain a mixture of vegetable oils vegetable oils fflo:foundAt Storage recovered around 1,020 litres of unidentified oil suspected to be used as raw materiala:T1007,6500 litres of fake ghee found by food regulator during a raid in Delhi and Haryana indiatimes.com Listen to this article in summarized format
The action was conducted by Central Food Safety Officers under the supervision of Devesh Kumar Mahla, IPS, Director of the Northern Regional Office of FSSAI, in coordination with local police authorities.
Decoy operation leads to investigation
According to FSSAI, the probe was initiated after officials detected digital and print advertisements promoting premium cow ghee and regular ghee without mandatory FSSAI licence details and prescribed labelling information.Officials then carried out a decoy operation by posing as consumers and purchasing samples of the products. The samples were sent to an FSSAI-recognised NABL-accredited laboratory for analysis.
Laboratory findings showed that the samples failed to meet the standards prescribed for ghee under the Food Safety and Standards Regulations and contained a mixture of vegetable oils and other non-dairy constituents.
Raids conducted in Delhi and Haryana
Based on the laboratory results, FSSAI traced the alleged manufacturing, storage and distribution chain and conducted enforcement operations at multiple locations in Delhi and Haryana on June 17.In Delhi, officials raided a facility in Village Dhulsiras, Dwarka, linked to Parit Ram. During the operation, approximately 1,020 litres of unidentified oil suspected to be used in the manufacture of counterfeit ghee and around 1,500 litres of suspected adulterated ghee were recovered. The seized stock has been placed under regulatory custody.
In Haryana, a separate operation was carried out at M/S Bala Ji Food Products in Sonipat, where officials seized more than 4,000 litres of suspected adulterated ghee packaged for market distribution.
Speaking about the operation, Mahla said, "We have seized around 6500 liter of adulterated ghee. It was manufactured with vegetable and animal fat as per the lab report. It was a good operation with FSSAI making decoy and organised surveillance and action."
FIR registered, investigation continues
FSSAI said a formal complaint has been filed with local police authorities and an FIR has been registered against those involved. Statutory enforcement samples have also been collected for further examination, while the seized materials remain under regulatory custody.The regulator said further investigations are underway to identify other entities allegedly connected to the network and reiterated its zero-tolerance policy towards food adulteration and misbranding. ghee adulteration seizure recall_triggered Delhi, India Haryana, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable oils contained a mixture of vegetable oils ghee fflo:hasAdulterant non-dairy constituents and other non-dairy constituents ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Parit Ram facility in Village Dhulsiras, Dwarka, linked to Parit Ram suspected adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt Village Dhulsiras, Dwarka 1,500 litres of suspected adulterated ghee were recovered ghee adulteration finding fflo:inRegion Delhi Raids conducted in Delhi and Haryana ghee adulteration finding fflo:inRegion Haryana Raids conducted in Delhi and Haryana ghee adulteration method fflo:hasFraudType Substitution contained a mixture of vegetable oils and other non-dairy constituents ghee mislabeling method fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling without mandatory FSSAI licence details and prescribed labelling information suspected adulterated ghee fflo:foundAtStep Processing alleged manufacturing, storage and distribution chain suspected adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt Storage storage and distribution chain ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable fat manufactured with vegetable and animal fat as per the lab report ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat manufactured with vegetable and animal fat as per the lab report adulteration of ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith M/S Bala Ji Food Products seized more than 4,000 litres of suspected adulterated ghee manufacturing ghee with vegetable and animal fat fflo:hasFraudType Substitution manufactured with vegetable and animal fatb:Tc5a,FDA Crackdown On Adulterated & Banned Food In Vasai-Virar: 18 Shops Sealed, ₹14 Lakh Worth Goods Confiscated freepressjournal.in Vasai: Following strict directives from Tukaram Mundhe, Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), a massive crackdown has been launched against adulterated and banned food products within the jurisdiction of the Vasai-Virar Municipal Corporation.
FDA crackdown intensifies
Over the last 18 days, the FDA has intensified its operations, leading to significant seizures and the sealing of several establishments. A total of 18 shops have been sealed, and adulterated goods valued at approximately Rs. 14 lakh have been confiscated.
Massive edible oil seizure
In one operation, FDA teams raided three different establishments in the Jumhapalika jurisdiction. A staggering 4,798 kilograms of edible oil, worth Rs. 9,14,698, was seized. The oil was found stored in old and reused tins that are hazardous to human health. Furthermore, officials suspect the oil does not meet government safety standards, and samples have been sent for lab analysis. This major operation took place as part of the campaign that began on May 27, in response to Mundhe's call to take direct action against those playing with citizens' health.
Ice cream raids intensified
The FDA is also keeping a close watch on ice cream factories and shops, as consumption rises during the summer months. During recent raids officials seized 986 liters of ice cream valued at Rs. 1,97,200. Authorities suspect this ice cream was not produced in adherence to standard quality norms.
Banned gutkha action
Under the ongoing 'Raid on Banned Food Substances' campaign, the administration is targeting not only adulterated food but also banned products like gutkha and pan masala. 18 shops selling banned gutkha have been sealed. In connection with these cases, authorities have seized goods worth Rs. 2,10,571 and arrested 19 individuals.
Official statement
Venktesh Chavan, Assistant Commissioner, Food and Drug Administration Palghar, emphasized the administration's resolve, stating, “The campaign against food adulteration has been intensified. Special teams have been deployed to conduct raids across various locations. Strict action will be taken if any food adulteration or sale of banned products is found within the Vasai-Virar municipal area. This campaign will continue in the future.”
To get details on exclusive and budget-friendly property deals in Mumbai & surrounding regions, do visit: https://budgetproperties.in/ edible oil substandard contamination seizure sealing suspected Vasai-Virar, Palghar, Maharashtra, India edible oil fflo:belongsToCategory Oils 4,798 kilograms of edible oil FDA Crackdown in Vasai-Virar fflo:targets edible oil crackdown has been launched against adulterated and banned food products edible oil fflo:hasAdulterant hazardous storage contaminants stored in old and reused tins that are hazardous to human health sealing of 18 shops fflo:issuedBy Food and Drug Administration 18 shops selling banned gutkha have been sealed arrest of 19 individuals fflo:issuedBy Food and Drug Administration arrested 19 individualsc:T1770,FSSAI issues notices to 14 food brands over allegedly misleading brand names socialsamosa.com The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) has issued notices to 14 food business operators (FBOs) for allegedly using misleading brand names, trade names and product claims in violation of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006.
The companies that received notices are Emami Healthy & Tasty, Health Aid, Troovy, The Healthy Factory, Healthy Master, Healthy Choice, Plan B, Neuherbs, Organic Wisdom, Shine Organic, Two Brothers Organic Farms, World of Organic, Storia and Iota Water.
The notices relate to the use of terms such as "organic" and "healthy" in product names and marketing claims. The products involved include bread, poha, vitamins, pizza bases, chips, oil, ghee and packaged drinking water.
In its notice, FSSAI said, “FBOs are directed to strictly comply with the established labelling and display regulations to prevent consumer deception.”
Among the companies flagged was Emami Healthy & Tasty, the cooking oils business of the Emami Group. FSSAI said its trade name is "likely to mislead consumers and appears to be in contravention of applicable FSSAI regulations".
Plan B, which markets products as "plant based vegan", was also issued a notice. FSSAI said the company appeared to create the impression that its products are vegan without obtaining prior approval for vegan food endorsement in its FSSAI licence. The regulator specifically referred to the company's Cheddar Block product, a cashew-based paste.
FSSAI also questioned Neuherbs' use of the trade name "True Vitamin". The regulator said the term is “misleading and does not conform to the applicable regulations”. It added that "True Vitamin" is neither defined nor recognised under existing regulations and may mislead consumers.
The regulator flagged The Healthy Factory's "Zero Maida Whole Wheat Bread", which contains chakki fresh atta and wheat gluten, for allegedly misleading consumers and being in contravention of applicable regulations. Its "Zero Maida Pizza Base" product was also cited for similar reasons.
Troovy's snack products, including "Healthy Mix Veggie Chips", "Healthy Ragi Chips" and "Healthy Moong Dal Chips", were flagged for allegedly making misleading "healthy" claims despite containing multiple other ingredients.
FSSAI also raised concerns over Healthy Master's tagline, "Vision to Serve Healthy", Healthy Choice's "Healthy Food for Healthy Life Poha", and Health Aid's trade name, saying they are likely to mislead consumers about the nature of the products.
Health Aid's "Salmon Oil" product was also cited. According to FSSAI, its trade name “is likely to mislead consumers and appears to be in contravention of applicable FSSAI regulations”.
Organic Wisdom's "Quinoa Jowar Pasta" was issued a notice over claims relating to its organic status. FSSAI said the product does not have National Programme for Organic Production (NPOP) or Participatory Guarantee System (PGS) certification, the Jaivik Bharat logo, or the required organic endorsement.
Shine Organic's "Unnab Ber" (Jujube) and Two Brothers Organic Farms' "Cultured Ghee" were also flagged for allegedly creating a misleading impression regarding the organic status of the products.
Similarly, World of Organic's "Healthy Trail Mix" was found to be creating the impression that the product is certified organic despite lacking the required certification and endorsement, according to the regulator.
FSSAI also issued a notice to Storia for its Pomegranate Juice product. The regulator alleged that the product creates the impression that it is entirely pomegranate juice despite containing only 4% pomegranate juice concentrate.
Iota Water's "Water Feel The Difference" claim was also questioned. FSSAI said claims regarding the addition of minerals in packaged drinking water are misleading. The regulator cited existing rules stating that "No product shall claim the term 'added nutrients', if such nutrients have been added merely to compensate the nutrients lost or removed during processing of the food."
FSSAI, a statutory body under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, announced the action through its official social media channels. ghee mislabeling notice_issued alleged India Cheddar Block fflo:hasIngredient cashew Cheddar Block product, a cashew-based paste Health Aid Salmon Oil misleading name finding fflo:foundIn Salmon Oil Health Aid's "Salmon Oil" product was also cited. According to FSSAI, its trade name “is likely to mislead consumers and appears to be in contravention of applicable FSSAI regulations”. Organic Wisdom Quinoa Jowar Pasta organic claim finding prov:wasAttributedTo Organic Wisdom Organic Wisdom's "Quinoa Jowar Pasta" was issued a notice Organic Wisdom Quinoa Jowar Pasta organic claim finding fflo:foundIn Quinoa Jowar Pasta Organic Wisdom's "Quinoa Jowar Pasta" was issued a notice Two Brothers Organic Farms Cultured Ghee organic claim finding prov:wasAttributedTo Two Brothers Organic Farms Two Brothers Organic Farms' "Cultured Ghee" were also flagged Two Brothers Organic Farms Cultured Ghee organic claim finding fflo:foundIn Cultured Ghee Two Brothers Organic Farms' "Cultured Ghee" were also flagged World of Organic Healthy Trail Mix organic claim finding prov:wasAttributedTo World of Organic World of Organic's "Healthy Trail Mix" was found to be creating the impression The Healthy Factory fflo:compliesWith applicable regulations The regulator flagged The Healthy Factory's "Zero Maida Whole Wheat Bread"... for allegedly misleading consumers and being in contravention of applicable regulations. Zero Maida Whole Wheat Bread fflo:hasIngredient chakki fresh atta contains chakki fresh atta and wheat gluten Zero Maida Whole Wheat Bread fflo:hasIngredient wheat gluten contains chakki fresh atta and wheat gluten Health Aid Salmon Oil misleading name finding prov:wasAttributedTo Health Aid Health Aid's "Salmon Oil" product was also cited.d:T1cf4,FSSAI issues notices to 14 food companies over misleading ‘healthy,' ‘organic’ claims newindianexpress.com NEW DELHI: The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) on Sunday issued notices to 14 food business operators (FBOs) for allegedly using misleading brand names, trade names and product claims in violation of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006.
The companies served notices include Emami Healthy & Tasty, Health Aid, Troovy, The Healthy Factory, Healthy Master, Healthy Choice, Plan B, Neuherbs, Organic Wisdom, Shine Organic, Two Brothers Organic Farms, World of Organic, Storia and Iota Water.
The notices were issued for the use of terms such as "organic" and "healthy" in product names and claims. The products include bread, poha, vitamins, pizza bases, chips, oil, ghee and drinking water.
In its notice, FSSAI said, “FBOs are directed to strictly comply with the established labelling and display regulations to prevent consumer deception.”
Among the prominent names flagged is Emami Healthy & Tasty, the cooking oils arm of the Kolkata-based Emami Group.
FSSAI said its trade name is "likely to mislead consumers and appears to be in contravention of applicable FSSAI regulations”.
Plan B, which markets its products as "plant based vegan", also drew the food regulator's attention for allegedly creating the impression that its products are vegan without obtaining prior approval for vegan food endorsement in its FSSAI licence. The food regulator highlighted Plan B's Cheddar Block, a cashew-based paste.
On Neuherbs, FSSAI said its ‘True Vitamin’ trade name is “misleading and does not conform to the applicable regulations”. It further said the term “True Vitamin” is neither defined nor recognised under the regulations and may mislead consumers.
The Healthy Factory's "Zero Maida Whole Wheat Bread", which contains chakki fresh atta and wheat gluten, has been flagged for misleading consumers and being in contravention of applicable FSSAI regulations.
Its "Zero Maida Pizza Base" product also faced similar scrutiny. FSSAI noted that the claim appears to violate applicable regulations.
Troovy's range of snack products, including "Healthy Mix Veggie Chips", "Healthy Ragi Chips" and "Healthy Moong Dal Chips", have been flagged for allegedly making misleading "healthy" claims despite containing a range of other ingredients.
FSSAI also flagged Healthy Master's tagline, "Vision to Serve Healthy", Healthy Choice's "Healthy Food for Healthy Life Poha", and Health Aid's trade name as likely to mislead consumers about the nature of the products.
Health Aid’s ‘Salmon Oil’ was also flagged for its trade name, which FSSAI said “is likely to mislead consumers and appears to be in contravention of applicable FSSAI regulations”.
On Organic Wisdom’s ‘Quinoa Jowar Pasta’, the notice said the trade name is likely to mislead consumers regarding the organic status of the product, as it does not have NPOP/PGS certification, the FSSAI Jaivik Bharat logo, or the necessary organic endorsement.
Shine Organic’s ‘Unnab Ber’ (Jujube) and Two Brothers Organic Farms’ ‘Cultured Ghee’ were also called out for allegedly misleading consumers regarding the organic status of the products.
World of Organic’s ‘Healthy Trail Mix’ was also found to be creating a misleading impression that the product is certified organic, despite lacking the required organic certification and endorsement.
Storia Juice Pomegranate was served a notice for allegedly misleading consumers by creating the impression that it is solely pomegranate juice despite containing only 4 per cent pomegranate juice concentrate.
Iota Water’s ‘Water Feel The Difference’ was also served a notice. FSSAI said the claim regarding the addition of minerals in packaged drinking water is misleading. The existing regulations stipulate that "No product shall claim the term 'added nutrients', if such nutrients have been added merely to compensate the nutrients lost or removed during processing of the food."
The FSSAI, a statutory body under the Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, made the announcement through its official social media handles.
Earlier, FSSAI had served notices to Nestlé’s Maggi over alleged insect detection and KFC over quality and hygiene complaints. ghee mislabeling notice_issued alleged India Shine Organic Unnab Ber misleading claim finding fflo:foundIn Unnab Ber Shine Organic’s ‘Unnab Ber’ (Jujube) and Two Brothers Organic Farms’ ‘Cultured Ghee’ were also called out for allegedly misleading consumers regarding the organic status of the products. Two Brothers Organic Farms Cultured Ghee misleading claim finding prov:wasAttributedTo Two Brothers Organic Farms Two Brothers Organic Farms’ ‘Cultured Ghee’ were also called out for allegedly misleading consumers regarding the organic status of the products. Two Brothers Organic Farms Cultured Ghee misleading claim finding fflo:foundIn Cultured Ghee Two Brothers Organic Farms’ ‘Cultured Ghee’ were also called out for allegedly misleading consumers regarding the organic status of the products. World of Organic Healthy Trail Mix misleading claim finding fflo:foundIn Healthy Trail Mix World of Organic’s ‘Healthy Trail Mix’ was also found to be creating a misleading impression that the product is certified organic, despite lacking the required organic certification and endorsement. FSSAI Notice to 14 FBOs fflo:targets bread The products include bread, poha, vitamins, pizza bases, chips, oil, ghee and drinking water FSSAI Notice to 14 FBOs fflo:targets pizza bases The products include bread, poha, vitamins, pizza bases, chips, oil, ghee and drinking water FSSAI Notice to 14 FBOs fflo:targets chips The products include bread, poha, vitamins, pizza bases, chips, oil, ghee and drinking water FSSAI Notice to 14 FBOs fflo:targets oil The products include bread, poha, vitamins, pizza bases, chips, oil, ghee and drinking water FSSAI Notice to 14 FBOs fflo:targets ghee The products include bread, poha, vitamins, pizza bases, chips, oil, ghee and drinking water FSSAI Notice to 14 FBOs fflo:targets drinking water The products include bread, poha, vitamins, pizza bases, chips, oil, ghee and drinking water Misleading Labeling Incident prov:wasAttributedTo Emami Healthy & Tasty Among the prominent names flagged is Emami Healthy & Tasty Misleading Labeling fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling using misleading brand names, trade names and product claims Plan B Cheddar Block fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling creating the impression that its products are vegan without obtaining prior approval Health Aid Salmon Oil misleading claim finding prov:wasAttributedTo Health Aid Health Aid's 'Salmon Oil' was also flagged for its trade name Health Aid Salmon Oil misleading claim finding fflo:foundIn Salmon Oil Health Aid’s ‘Salmon Oil’ was also flagged Organic Wisdom Quinoa Jowar Pasta misleading claim finding prov:wasAttributedTo Organic Wisdom On Organic Wisdom's 'Quinoa Jowar Pasta', the notice said Organic Wisdom Quinoa Jowar Pasta misleading claim finding fflo:foundIn Quinoa Jowar Pasta On Organic Wisdom’s ‘Quinoa Jowar Pasta’ World of Organic Healthy Trail Mix misleading claim finding prov:wasAttributedTo World of Organic World of Organic's 'Healthy Trail Mix' was also found to be creating a misleading impressione:T1787,This toxic adulterant in edible oils can damage your nervous system: Here's how to check if your cooking oil is safe indiatimes.com Most people worry about calories when they reach for their cooking oil. Very few think to worry about paralysis. But there is a chemical adulterant that has caused mass poisoning events across multiple continents, left tens of thousands of people permanently disabled, and has been found in edible oils in India. It's called tri-ortho-cresyl phosphate, or TOCP, and it has no place in food.
So what is it, how does it get into cooking oil, and what can you actually do about it at home? Here's what you need to know.
TOCP is an organophosphorus compound primarily used in industrial settings as a lubricant, plasticiser, and jet engine oil additive. 
TOCP is highly toxic and can induce neurotoxicity, reproductive toxicity, and immunotoxicity. Most critically, it causes a delayed neurodegenerative condition known as organophosphate-induced delayed neurotoxicity, which affects both the central and peripheral nerves and can result in permanent damage to the neurological system.
This isn't theoretical. The damage TOCP can do has been documented in outbreak after outbreak over more than a century. In 1930, TOCP was added to an alcoholic beverage in the United States, leaving between 20,000 and 100,000 people permanently affected. Early symptoms included numbness and tingling in the extremities, with partial permanent paralysis at higher doses.
In 1959, Morocco  experienced an epidemic of paralysis after poor Arab families unknowingly cooked with olive oil adulterated with TOCP, which had been acquired cheaply as a jet engine flushing fluid. By the end of that outbreak, over 10,000 individuals had been afflicted.
India has not been spared. Outbreaks of TOCP-induced delayed neurotoxicity have been reported in Mumbai, where 58 patients were affected, and four subsequent outbreaks were documented in Bengal. Patients presented with cramping muscle pain, numbness, progressive weakness in the limbs, and in severe cases, spasticity and loss of function in both legs and arms.
FSSAI has developed a rapid testing programme called DART, which stands for Detect Adulteration with Rapid Test, specifically designed so that consumers can check common adulterants without laboratory equipment.
For TOCP specifically, the FSSAI-recommended test involves taking 2ml of the oil sample and adding a small amount of solid yellow butter to it. If red colour forms immediately, it indicates the presence of TOCP in the oil. It's a simple, inexpensive test that takes under a minute and can be done in any kitchen.
Beyond the TOCP-specific test, there are broader checks worth doing with any cooking oil. A refrigerator test is useful: place oil in a glass in the fridge for two to three hours. Pure oils show uniform thickening, while adulterated oils often separate into cloudy layers. A visual clarity check also helps since pure oils are generally transparent and consistent in colour. Anything that looks murky, has an unusual odour, or separates unexpectedly warrants caution.
For oils sold loose or in unlabelled containers, the risk is significantly higher. India has a documented history of oil adulteration, including the 1998 Delhi mustard oil poisoning that killed 60 people and made over 3,000 ill. Buying oil in sealed, branded, FSSAI-licensed packaging with a clearly marked batch number and manufacturing date isn't a guarantee, but it substantially reduces the risk. mustard oil adulteration contamination alleged Delhi, India TOCP fflo:commonIn Morocco Morocco experienced an epidemic of paralysis after poor Arab families unknowingly cooked with olive oil adulterated with TOCP TOCP fflo:commonIn Mumbai Outbreaks of TOCP-induced delayed neurotoxicity have been reported in Mumbai TOCP fflo:causesEffect delayed neurotoxicity TOCP-induced delayed neurotoxicity 1998 Delhi poisoning incident fflo:inRegion Delhi 1998 Delhi mustard oil poisoning tri-ortho-cresyl phosphate fflo:causesEffect organophosphate-induced delayed neurotoxicity it causes a delayed neurodegenerative condition known as organophosphate-induced delayed neurotoxicity tri-ortho-cresyl phosphate fflo:causesEffect neurotoxicity TOCP is highly toxic and can induce neurotoxicity tri-ortho-cresyl phosphate fflo:causesEffect reproductive toxicity TOCP is highly toxic and can induce neurotoxicity, reproductive toxicity, and immunotoxicity. tri-ortho-cresyl phosphate fflo:causesEffect immunotoxicity TOCP is highly toxic and can induce neurotoxicity, reproductive toxicity, and immunotoxicity edible oils fflo:hasAdulterant tri-ortho-cresyl phosphate has been found in edible oils in India tri-ortho-cresyl phosphate fflo:commonIn India found in edible oils in India tri-ortho-cresyl phosphate fflo:commonIn United States TOCP was added to an alcoholic beverage in the United States tri-ortho-cresyl phosphate fflo:causesEffect organophosphate-induced delayed neurotoxicity TOCP is highly toxic and can induce neurotoxicity tri-ortho-cresyl phosphate fflo:causesEffect permanent paralysis partial permanent paralysis at higher doses TOCP fflo:commonIn Bengal four subsequent outbreaks were documented in Bengal TOCP fflo:causesEffect cramping muscle pain Patients presented with cramping muscle pain TOCP fflo:causesEffect spasticity in severe cases, spasticity and loss of function TOCP fflo:detectedBy DART For TOCP specifically, the FSSAI-recommended test involves taking 2ml of the oil sample refrigerator test fflo:producesIndicator separation into cloudy layers adulterated oils often separate into cloudy layers refrigerator test fflo:producesIndicator uniform thickening Pure oils show uniform thickening visual clarity check fflo:producesIndicator murky appearance Anything that looks murky, has an unusual odour, or separates unexpectedly warrants caution 1998 Delhi mustard oil poisoning fflo:associatedWith illness 1998 Delhi mustard oil poisoning that killed 60 people and made over 3,000 illf:Td89,Maharashtra FDA Cracks Down On Gutkha And Unsafe Food; 33 Arrested, Goods Worth Over ₹8.56 Crore Seized freepressjournal.in Mumbai, June 9: The Maharashtra Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has continued its statewide crackdown against banned gutkha, pan masala and unsafe food products, resulting in the arrest of 33 persons, sealing of 19 establishments and seizure of goods worth over Rs 31 lakh between June 6 and June 8, 2026.
The action was carried out under the directions of FDA Commissioner Tukaram Mundhe as part of the department’s ongoing drive against prohibited tobacco products and food adulteration.
Statewide raids and arrests
According to officials, raids were conducted across Mumbai, Konkan, Pune, Nashik, Chhatrapati Sambhajinagar, Amravati and Nagpur divisions targeting gutkha and pan masala sellers as well as establishments violating food safety norms.
The Konkan division recorded the highest number of actions with raids on 10 establishments and arrest of nine persons. In Mumbai, officials conducted raids at six locations and arrested six accused.
Pune division saw action at five places with five arrests, while three persons were arrested in Chhatrapati Sambhajinagar.
In Amravati, seven establishments were raided and seven persons arrested, while Nagpur division recorded four arrests following action against four establishments.
Officials said FIRs were registered under sections of BNS along with relevant provisions of the Food Safety and Standards Act. Goods worth Rs 31.46 lakh were seized during the operation.
Campaign against adulterated and unsafe food
Apart from the anti-gutkha drive, the FDA also launched a large-scale campaign against adulterated and unsafe food products under its “Safe Food, Safe Drug, Safe Maharashtra” initiative.
Between June 1 and June 8, food safety officers inspected 120 establishments across the state and seized nearly 8.10 lakh kilograms of suspected substandard food items and adulterants worth around Rs 8.25 crore.
The seized products included khoya, jaggery, edible oil, energy drinks and other food materials suspected to be unsafe or misleadingly packaged.
Officials said food samples collected during the raids have been sent to laboratories for analysis.
Also Watch:
Public advisory
The FDA has appealed to citizens to report cases of food adulteration or sale of suspicious food products through the FoSCOS portal, Food Safety Connect App or the toll-free helpline 1800-222-365.
“Playing with public health will not be tolerated. Citizens have a right to safe and pure food. Strict action will continue against those involved in adulteration or sale of banned substances,” Commissioner Tukaram Mundhe said.
To get details on exclusive and budget-friendly property deals in Mumbai & surrounding regions, do visit: https://budgetproperties.in/ edible oil substandard unsafe_food seizure suspected Maharashtra, India statewide crackdown against banned gutkha fflo:issuedBy Maharashtra Food and Drug Administration Maharashtra Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has continued its statewide crackdown against banned gutkha statewide crackdown against banned gutkha fflo:targets gutkha crackdown against banned gutkha statewide crackdown against banned gutkha fflo:targets pan masala crackdown against banned gutkha, pan masala statewide crackdown against banned gutkha fflo:targets unsafe food products crackdown against banned gutkha, pan masala and unsafe food products10:Ta95,Articles worth over Rs 15.8 lakh seized by FDA in week long raids indiatimes.com Nashik: The Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) has launched a crackdown on food business operators across Nashik district to ensure consumers receive safe, unadulterated and quality food products.
As part of the drive conducted between May 28 and June 4, FDA officials carried out inspections at multiple establishments and seized food articles and prohibited products collectively worth over Rs 15 lakh.
Senior FDA officials said the department is continuously gathering confidential information about establishments allegedly selling substandard food items and taking action against violators.
Acting on a tip-off that ice cream and frozen desserts were being manufactured under unhygienic conditions at Madasangvi, FDA officials raided the unit and seized stock worth Rs 8,000.
On the same day, the department inspected a chikki manufacturing unit in Niphad and confiscated peanut chikki stock valued at Rs 15,200. In another action, soybean oil being sold loose at a shop in Chandwad was seized for violating food safety norms.
FDA officials said similar inspections and enforcement operations were conducted in Igatpuri, Sinnar, Khode Nagar and Panchavati in Nashik city, as well as Deola, Peth, Malegaon and Girnare.
During the seven-day drive, officials collected samples of khoya (mawa), farsan, caffeinated beverages, milk and loose edible oil for laboratory analysis. Large quantities of state-banned food products, including gutka and scented tobacco, were also seized from individuals and transporters in Igatpuri, Deola, Panchavati and Mumbai Naka.
“The department is continuously gathering confidential information regarding the sale of substandard and adulterated food products. Strict action is being taken against violators to safeguard public health,” an FDA official said.
The drive is being conducted under the directives of Maharashtra FDA Commissioner Tukaram Mundhe and the guidance of Joint Commissioner (Food) Shrikant Karkale.
Officials have appealed to citizens to immediately report instances of food adulteration or related violations through the FDA’s toll-free helpline, 1800-222-365. soybean oil substandard unsafe_food seizure suspected Chandwad, Nashik, Maharashtra, India ice cream fflo:hasAdulterationMethod manufacturing under unhygienic conditions ice cream and frozen desserts were being manufactured under unhygienic conditions frozen desserts fflo:hasAdulterationMethod manufacturing under unhygienic conditions ice cream and frozen desserts were being manufactured under unhygienic conditions soybean oil fflo:foundAtStep Retail soybean oil being sold loose at a shop in Chandwad11:Tfb9,Nashik: FDA Seizes Suspected And Illegal Food Stock Worth ₹15.89 Lakh In Week-Long Crackdown freepressjournal.in Nashik: The Food and Drug Administration (FDA), Nashik Division, has launched a special campaign to ensure that citizens have access to pure, authentic, and nutritious food products. Under this campaign, during the seven-day period from May 28 to June 3, 2026, the division seized a stock of suspicious and illegal food products valued at ₹15,89,533.
This operation was carried out under the directives of FDA Commissioner Tukaram Mundhe and under the guidance of Joint Commissioner (Food) Shrikant Karkale. Teams comprising Food Safety Officers Amit Raskar, Sanket Yelmam, Govinda Gaikwad, Vaibhav Gade, S.D. Mahajan, Rutuja Navale, Akshay Khedkar, Sandeep Torne, Pratik Bhad, Sonal Padale, Chetan Pardeshi, Suhas Mandlik, Akshay Gadekar, and Umesh Suryavanshi conducted raids at various locations.
Key Raids and Seizures
- May 29: At 'Krishna Ice Cream' in Madsangvi, it was discovered that ice cream was being manufactured under unhygienic conditions. Samples of the 'Frozen Dessert' were collected, and a stock worth ₹8,000 was seized.
- May 29: At 'Maharashtra Chikki' in Kundewadi (Niphad Taluka), production was found to be underway without a valid license. 71.250 kg of 'Peanut Chikki' (valued at ₹15,200) was seized.
- May 29: In Chandwad, refined soybean oil was found being sold in loose form. 148.4 kg of oil (valued at ₹22,260) was seized.
- May 29: In Igatpuri, a stock of food products banned by the Government of Maharashtra was found kept for sale; consequently, stock worth ₹5,620 was seized. A case regarding this incident has been registered at the Igatpuri Police Station. - May 30: At Binnar Dairy in Sinnar, 'Khoya' (solidified milk solids) was found being sold under unhygienic conditions. 26 kg of Khoya (valued at ₹7,480) was seized.
- June 3: In Peth (Peth Taluka), stocks of 'Sting' and 'Monster' energy drinks, valued at ₹20,880, were seized.
- June 3: In Panchavati, a vehicle transporting banned food products was seized (valued at ₹4,26,584).
- June 3: On Peth Road, Panchavati, another vehicle transporting banned food products was seized (valued at ₹3,75,640).
- June 3: In Malegaon, milk samples were collected, and a stock of 58 litres of milk was destroyed.
Appeal by the Administration
D. G. Tamboli, Joint Commissioner (Food) of the Food and Drug Administration, stated: “A constant vigil is being maintained over those involved in food adulteration and illegal business practices. Various teams are active across the district. We appeal to the citizens that, should they encounter any adulterated or suspicious food products, they should immediately contact our toll-free number: 1800222365.”
This campaign has created a perception that food safety standards are being significantly strengthened within the Nashik district. soybean oil substandard unsafe_food seizure suspected Chandwad, Nashik, Maharashtra, India FDA Seizes Suspected And Illegal Food Stock fflo:targets Peanut Chikki 71.250 kg of 'Peanut Chikki' (valued at ₹15,200) was seized manufacturing ice cream under unhygienic conditions prov:wasAssociatedWith Krishna Ice Cream ice cream was being manufactured under unhygienic conditions Seizure of banned food products in Panchavati fflo:foundAtStep Distribution vehicle transporting banned food products was seized seizure of refined soybean oil fflo:issuedBy Food and Drug Administration 148.4 kg of oil (valued at ₹22,260) was seized. seizure of banned food products fflo:issuedBy Food and Drug Administration stock of food products banned by the Government of Maharashtra was found kept for sale; consequently, stock worth ₹5,620 was seized destruction of 58 litres of milk fflo:issuedBy Food and Drug Administration milk samples were collected, and a stock of 58 litres of milk was destroyed seizure of refined soybean oil in Chandwad fflo:inRegion Nashik In Chandwad, refined soybean oil was found being sold in loose form.12:T1099,Tirupati ghee adulteration case: ED seizes  ₹60-lakh cash in searches hindustantimes.com Tirupati ghee adulteration case: ED seizes ₹60-lakh cash in searches
Investigators learned that the proceeds of crime had been invested in properties valued at above ₹45 crore, as well as in several immovable properties held in the names of accused persons and their family members
MUMBAI: The Enforcement Directorate (ED) on Wednesday conducted searches at 15 locations in several states, including Mumbai and Ahilyanagar in Maharashtra, as part of its money-laundering investigation linked to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) ghee adulteration case.
Cash worth ₹60 lakh was seized during the search operations, officials said. Investigators also learned that the proceeds of crime had been invested in properties valued at above ₹45 crore, as well as in several immovable properties held in the names of accused persons and their family members.
The agency also seized various incriminating documents indicating the use of an alleged complex network of legal entities to facilitate bogus sale and purchase transactions for the concealment and layering of proceeds of crime, officials said.
The search operations covered the premises of dairy companies such as Malganga Milk & Agro Products Pvt Ltd in Ahilyanagar, AR Dairy Food Pvt Ltd in Dindigul (Tamil Nadu), and Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Milk Pvt Ltd in Roorkee (Uttarakhand), apart from other premises belonging to suspect entities and individuals in Mumbai, Bikaner (Rajasthan), Dehradun (Uttarakhand), Delhi, and Guntur (Andhra Pradesh).
The searches covered the residential and office premises of individuals identified as Machindra Lanke, Pomil Jain, Vipin Jain, Raju Rajasekaran, Rajesh Mansukhlal Chavda, Apurva Vinaykanth Chavda, Ajay Kumar Sugandh, Mahesh Kumar Rohira and Ashish Agarwal, officials said.
The TTD is a trust set up by the Andhra Pradesh government that primarily oversees the operations and finances of the Venkateswara Temple in Tirumala, Tirupati district. In September 2024, Andhra Pradesh chief minister N Chandrababu Naidu had alleged that animal fat was used to prepare the famed Tirumala laddu during the previous regime in the state.
A charge sheet submitted by the Central Bureau of Investigation-led special investigation team to the Andhra Pradesh High Court in January this year alleged that adulterated ghee was supplied to the trust between 2019 and 2024. The ghee was allegedly not made from cow milk but artificially produced using palm kernel oil, palm oil, and palm stearin.
The ED initiated its investigation based on a case registered against AR Dairy Food Pvt Ltd and others, wherein it was alleged that the accused persons, in conspiracy with certain TTD officials, committed criminal breach of trust, cheating, and caused wrongful loss to the trust by supplying adulterated ghee.
The agency’s investigation so far has revealed that the proceeds of crime generated through the supply of adulterated ghee to TTD were subsequently invested in immovable properties through a complex web of interconnected legal entities and business concerns, officials said. ghee adulteration investigation alleged India, Tirupati Malganga Milk & Agro Products Pvt Ltd fflo:foundAt Ahilyanagar premises of dairy companies such as Malganga Milk & Agro Products Pvt Ltd in Ahilyanagar AR Dairy Food Pvt Ltd fflo:foundAt Dindigul AR Dairy Food Pvt Ltd in Dindigul (Tamil Nadu) Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Milk Pvt Ltd fflo:foundAt Roorkee Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Milk Pvt Ltd in Roorkee (Uttarakhand) Adulteration of ghee supplied to TTD prov:used ghee supplying adulterated ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm kernel oil artificially produced using palm kernel oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil artificially produced using palm kernel oil, palm oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm stearin artificially produced using palm kernel oil, palm oil, and palm stearin palm stearin fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee adulterated ghee was supplied... not made from cow milk but artificially produced using palm kernel oil, palm oil, and palm stearin Adulteration of ghee supplied to TTD prov:wasAssociatedWith TTD officials accused persons, in conspiracy with certain TTD officials13:Tef1,Jalna Factory Raided For Making Fake Ghee, Rs 13 Lakh Stock Seized rediff.com The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has cracked down on an adulterated ghee manufacturing unit in Jalna, Maharashtra, seizing over Rs 13 lakh worth of fake products and initiating legal proceedings to ensure food safety.
Key Points
- The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) raided a factory in Jalna, Maharashtra, seizing over Rs 13 lakh worth of suspected adulterated ghee.
- The factory was allegedly producing fake ghee on a large scale by mixing edible oil and flavouring essence.
- Refined soybean oil and synthetic essence were used to create ghee resembling genuine dairy products.
- Eight food samples, including five branded ghee products, loose ghee, refined soybean oil, and essence, were collected for laboratory analysis.
- The factory has been sealed, and legal action under the Food Safety and Standards Act will be initiated after test reports are received.
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has seized suspected adulterated ghee worth over Rs 13 lakh after raiding a factory in Jalna district of central Maharashtra, officials said on Thursday.
FDA Uncovers Adulteration Racket
During the raid, an FDA team found that the unit was allegedly manufacturing adulterated ghee on a large scale by mixing edible oil and flavouring essence. The operation at the facility in Tirthpuri village under Ghansawangi tehsil revealed the use of refined soybean oil and synthetic essence to produce ghee resembling genuine dairy products, they said.
The team collected eight food samples for laboratory analysis, including samples of five branded ghee products, loose ghee from open stock, refined soybean oil and essence used in the manufacturing process, according to the officials. A total of 1,903.6 litres of material was seized during the raid, comprising 1,121.8 litres of packed ghee, 663.8 litres of loose ghee and 118 litres of refined soybean oil. The total value of the seized stock was Rs 13,04,539, they informed.
Following the seizure, the factory was sealed until further orders. Food samples have been sent to a laboratory for analysis and further legal action will be initiated under the Food Safety and Standards Act after receipt of the test reports, stated the officials. "We will initiate legal proceedings against the company owner after receiving the laboratory analysis reports," Assistant Commissioner (FDA) N S Kulkarni said. ghee adulteration substitution refined soybean oil synthetic essence raid seizure factory sealed legal proceedings alleged Jalna, Maharashtra, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant refined soybean oil Refined soybean oil and synthetic essence were used to create ghee resembling genuine dairy products. ghee fflo:hasAdulterant synthetic essence Refined soybean oil and synthetic essence were used to create ghee resembling genuine dairy products. synthetic essence fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee Refined soybean oil and synthetic essence were used to create ghee resembling genuine dairy products. ghee fflo:hasAdulterant synthetic essence synthetic essence to produce ghee mixing edible oil and flavouring essence fflo:hasFraudType Substitution producing fake ghee on a large scale by mixing edible oil and flavouring essence mixing edible oil and flavouring essence fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional allegedly producing fake ghee on a large scale laboratory analysis fso:isPerformedOn ghee samples from Jalna collected for laboratory analysis mixing edible oil and flavouring essence fflo:hasFraudType Substitution mixing edible oil and flavouring essence mixing edible oil and flavouring essence fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional allegedly manufacturing adulterated ghee on a large scale laboratory analysis fso:isPerformedOn ghee sample Food samples have been sent to a laboratory for analysis14:T720,ED conducts searches in TTD adulterated ghee case, uncovers assets worth over ₹45 crore thehindu.com The Directorate of Enforcement (ED), Hyderabad Zonal Office, conducted searches at 15 locations across eight cities on Wednesday, in connection with the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) adulterated ghee case.
The searches were carried out in Ahilyanagar, Bikaner, Dehradun, Delhi, Dindigul, Guntur, Mumbai and Roorkee, at the residential and office premises of several accused persons, including Pomil Jain, Vipin Jain, Raju Rajasekaran, Rajesh Mansukhlal Chavda, Apurva Vinaykanth Chavda, Machindra Shantaram Lanke, Ajay Kumar Sugandh, Mahesh Kumar Rohira and Ashish Agarwal.
According to the ED, cash amounting to ₹60 lakh was seized during the searches. Investigators also gathered details of investments allegedly made from proceeds of crime in properties valued at more than ₹45 crore, besides identifying several immovable properties held in the names of the accused and their family members.
Searches were also conducted at dairy plants operated by A.R. Dairy Food Pvt. Ltd., Malganga Milk & Agro Products Pvt. Ltd. and Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Milk Pvt. Ltd. The agency said incriminating documents were recovered, indicating the use of multiple business entities to conceal and layer proceeds of crime.
The ED initiated its probe under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act based on an FIR alleging that adulterated ghee was supplied to TTD, causing wrongful loss to the temple body. Further investigation is under way.
Published - June 03, 2026 07:22 pm IST ghee adulteration search seizure alleged Hyderabad, Telangana, India TTD adulterated ghee case prov:used ghee adulterated ghee was supplied to TTD TTD adulterated ghee case prov:wasAssociatedWith Pomil Jain accused persons, including Pomil Jain15:Tb8a,Tirumala ghee adulteration case: ED conducts searches at 15 locations across states india.com The Directorate of Enforcement (ED), Hyderabad Zonal Office, on Wednesday conducted search operations at 15 locations across various states in connection with the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) ghee adulteration fraud case.
The searches were conducted in Ahilyanagar, Bikaner, Dehradun, Delhi, Dindigul, Guntur, Mumbai and Roorkee.
According to an ED release, the searches covered the residential and office premises of Pomil Jain, Vipin Jain, Raju Rajasekaran, Rajesh Mansukhlal Chavda, Apurva Vinaykanth Chavda, Machindra Shantaram Lanke, Ajay Kumar Sugandh, Mahesh Kumar Rohira and Ashish Agarwal.
During the search operations, cash amounting to Rs 60 lakh was seized.
The searches also led to disclosures regarding investments of Proceeds of Crime (PoC) in properties valued at more than Rs 45 crore, apart from details of several immovable properties held in the names of the accused persons and their family members.
The search operations further covered the dairy plants of A.R. Dairy Food Pvt. Ltd., Dindigul; Malganga Milk & Agro Products Pvt. Ltd., Ahilyanagar; and Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Milk Pvt. Ltd., Roorkee.
Various incriminating documents were seized, indicating the use of a complex network of legal entities to facilitate bogus sale and purchase transactions for the concealment and layering of Proceeds of Crime.
The central agency said it initiated an investigation under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA), 2002, on the basis of an FIR registered against A.R. Dairy Food Pvt. Ltd. and others.
It is alleged that the accused persons, in conspiracy with certain TTD officials, committed criminal breach of trust, cheating, and caused wrongful loss to TTD by supplying adulterated ghee.
The investigation conducted so far has revealed that the Proceeds of Crime generated through the supply of adulterated ghee to TTD were subsequently invested in immovable properties through a complex web of interconnected legal entities and business concerns to conceal the illicit origin of funds.
Further investigation is in progress, the ED said.
Stay informed on all the latest news, real-time breaking news updates, and follow all the important headlines in india news and world news on Zee News. ghee adulteration contamination substitution unspecified search_and_seizure alleged Tirumala, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India Tirumala ghee adulteration fraud case prov:used ghee Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) ghee adulteration fraud case Tirumala ghee adulteration fraud case prov:wasAssociatedWith Pomil Jain searches covered the residential and office premises of Pomil Jain ghee adulteration act prov:used ghee supplying adulterated ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant unspecified adulterant supplying adulterated ghee supply of adulterated ghee to TTD prov:wasAssociatedWith TTD officials in conspiracy with certain TTD officials16:Tb99,TTD ghee adulteration case: ED raids 15 locations across 6 states, seizes Rs 60 lakh indiatimes.com NEW DELHI: The Enforcement Directorate (ED) conducted searches at 15 locations across 6 states in connection with the alleged Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) ghee adulteration fraud case on Wednesday.
The raids were carried out in Maharashtra's Ahilyanagar and Mumbai, Rajasthan's Bikaner, Uttarakhand's Dehradun and Roorkee, Tamil Nadu's Dindigul, Andhra Pradesh's Guntur, and Delhi, according to news agency PTI.
According to the agency, cash worth Rs 60 lakh was seized during the day-long operation.
The ED said the searches also unearthed details of investments of Proceeds of Crime (PoC) in properties valued at over Rs 45 crore. Information regarding several immovable properties allegedly held in the names of the accused persons and their family members was also gathered.
In a statement, the agency said its Hyderabad Zonal Office conducted searches at the residential and office premises of Pomil Jain, Vipin Jain, Raju Rajasekaran, Rajesh Mansukhlal Chavda, Apurva Vinaykanth Chavda, Machindra Shantaram Lanke, Ajay Kumar Sugandh, Mahesh Kumar Rohira and Ashish Agarwal.
The operation also covered the dairy plants of AR Dairy Food Pvt Ltd in Dindigul, Malganga Milk and Agro Products Pvt Ltd in Ahilyanagar, and Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Milk Pvt Ltd in Roorkee.
Various incriminating documents were seized during the searches. The ED said these documents indicate the use of a complex network of legal entities to facilitate bogus sale and purchase transactions aimed at concealing and layering the Proceeds of Crime.
The federal agency initiated its investigation under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA), 2002, based on a First Information Report (FIR) registered against AR Dairy Food Pvt Ltd and others. The accused are alleged to have conspired with certain TTD officials to commit criminal breach of trust and cheating, causing wrongful loss to the temple body by supplying adulterated ghee.
ED said its investigation conducted so far has revealed that the "Proceeds of Crime generated through the supply of adulterated ghee to TTD were subsequently invested in immovable properties through a complex web of interconnected legal entities and business concerns to conceal the illicit origin of funds." ghee adulteration investigation alleged India, across 6 states TTD ghee adulteration fraud case prov:wasAssociatedWith Pomil Jain searches at the residential and office premises of Pomil Jain TTD ghee adulteration fraud case prov:wasAssociatedWith Mahesh Kumar Rohira searches at the residential and office premises of ... Mahesh Kumar Rohira supply of adulterated ghee to TTD prov:wasAssociatedWith AR Dairy Food Pvt Ltd Proceeds of Crime generated through the supply of adulterated ghee to TTD TTD ghee adulteration prov:used ghee supplying adulterated ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant unspecified adulterant supplying adulterated ghee17:T14f4,Major crackdown on adulterated ghee and oil in Pokaran; over 14,000kg seized indiatimes.com JAISALMER: In a major action under the Rajasthan Governmentâs âShuddh Aahar Milawat Par Vaarâ campaign, authorities raided an illegal adulterated ghee and oil manufacturing unit in Pokaran late Sunday night and seized more than 14,000 kilograms of adulterated ghee and edible oil. 
The operation is being described as the largest crackdown on the fake ghee and oil trade in Jaisalmer district so far.
A special team from the Food Safety Department headquarters in Jaipur conducted a surprise raid at a residential property in Lodha Colony, Pokaran, where adulterated ghee and oil were being manufactured and packaged on a large scale. 
During the operation, officials collected 13 samples for testing and seized over 14,000 kilograms of suspected adulterated products.
The main accused reportedly fled from the spot before the raid. However, two workers found at the premises were detained and questioned. Investigators suspect the operation may be linked to a larger syndicate involved in the adulterated food business, with possible additional warehouses operating in Pokaran and nearby rural areas.
Confirming the action, Chief Medical and Health Officer (CMHO) Jaisalmer, Dr. 
Rajendra Kumar Paliwal, said the raid was carried out under the directions of Food Safety Commissioner Dr. T. Shubhamangala Rajasthan and under the leadership of Additional Commissioner (Food Safety) Bhagwat Singh, in coordination with the Jaisalmer health department.
Acting on specific intelligence, the team raided a premises belonging to Yogesh Tavari, owner of Satvik Trading Company, in Lodha Colony. Officials discovered large-scale manufacturing and packaging activities involving adulterated ghee and edible oils.
During the raid, five samples of adulterated ghee and oil were collected under the provisions of the Food Safety and Standards Act (FSS Act). Authorities seized approximately 10,260 kilograms of adulterated ghee, palm oil, soybean oil, and vanaspati from the site.
Subsequently, a raid was conducted at the companyâs warehouse, where officials collected eight additional samples of adulterated ghee sold under various brands, including Aahar, Shubh, Kuber, Shrimool, Vinayak, and Topper Milk Fat. Around 4,000 kilograms of adulterated ghee were seized from the warehouse.
Officials stated that the case appears to involve large-scale food adulteration that poses a serious threat to public health.
The operation was carried out by Jaipur-based Food Safety Officers Vinod Sharma, Devendra Singh, Lokesh Sharma, and Jagdish Prasad, along with Jaisalmer Food Safety Officer Kishanaram Kadwasara.
According to Kadwasara, all ghee and oil samples have been sent to the Jaipur laboratory for analysis. Further action under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 will be initiated once the laboratory reports are received.
Authorities also recovered around 650 tins containing palm oil, soybean oil, and vanaspati ghee. In addition, iron containers, raw chemical materials, and modern sealing machines used for packaging were seized from the premises.
The Jaipur headquarters had received information that adulterated ghee and oil were being manufactured and supplied to markets on a large scale from Pokaran. When the special team arrived at the house in Lodha Colony, they found the main gate locked from the outside to avoid suspicion. However, upon entering the premises, officials discovered two workers actively engaged in packaging adulterated ghee and oil.
The investigation is ongoing, and officials are exploring possible links to a wider network involved in the production and distribution of adulterated food products across the region. ghee edible oil palm oil soybean oil vanaspati adulteration unknown raid seizure detention suspected Pokaran, Jaisalmer, Rajasthan, India seizure of adulterated ghee and oil fflo:inRegion Pokaran raided an illegal adulterated ghee and oil manufacturing unit in Pokaran analysis of ghee and oil samples fso:isPerformedAt Jaipur laboratory all ghee and oil samples have been sent to the Jaipur laboratory for analysis analysis of ghee and oil samples fso:isPerformedAt Jaipur laboratory all ghee and oil samples have been sent to the Jaipur laboratory for analysis Adulteration of ghee and edible oils at Satvik Trading Company prov:wasAssociatedWith Yogesh Tavari premises belonging to Yogesh Tavari, owner of Satvik Trading Company Adulteration of ghee and edible oils at Satvik Trading Company prov:used ghee manufacturing and packaging activities involving adulterated ghee Adulteration of ghee and edible oils at Satvik Trading Company prov:used edible oil manufacturing and packaging activities involving adulterated ghee and edible oils Adulteration of ghee and edible oils at Satvik Trading Company prov:used palm oil seized approximately 10,260 kilograms of adulterated ghee, palm oil Adulteration of ghee and edible oils at Satvik Trading Company prov:used soybean oil seized approximately 10,260 kilograms of adulterated ghee, palm oil, soybean oil Adulteration of ghee and edible oils at Satvik Trading Company prov:used vanaspati seized approximately 10,260 kilograms of adulterated ghee, palm oil, soybean oil, and vanaspati adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt Storage raid was conducted at the companyâs warehouse18:Tf2e,ED raids 15 places in 6 states in Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams ghee adulteration case, Rs 60 lakh seized indiasnews.net New Delhi [India], June 3 (ANI): The Enforcement Directorate (ED) on Wednesday carried out searches at 15 locations across Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Uttarakhand, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh and Delhi in connection with the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) ghee adulteration fraud case.
The raids were conducted in Maharashtra's Ahilyanagar and Mumbai, Rajasthan's Bikaner, Uttarakhand's Dehradun and Roorkee, Tamil Nadu's Dindigul, Andhra Pradesh's Guntur, and Delhi.
ED claimed to have seized cash amounting to Rs 60 lakh during the day-long operation.
The searches also led to disclosures regarding investments of Proceeds of Crime (PoC) in properties valued at more than Rs 45 crore, apart from details of several immovable properties held in the names of the accused persons and their family members, the agency said.
ED further said its Hyderabad zonal office conducted the operation covering the residential and office premises of Pomil Jain, Vipin Jain, Raju Rajasekaran, Rajesh Mansukhlal Chavda, Apurva Vinaykanth Chavda, Machindra Shantaram Lanke, Ajay Kumar Sugandh, Mahesh Kumar Rohira, and Ashish Agarwal.
The search operations further covered the dairy plants of AR Dairy Food Pvt Ltd in Dindigul; Malganga Milk and Agro Products Pvt Ltd in Ahilyanagar; and Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Milk Pvt Ltd in Roorkee.
Various incriminating documents were seized, indicating the use of a complex network of legal entities to facilitate bogus sale and purchase transactions for concealment and layering of Proceeds of Crime, said the federal agency in a statement.
ED initiated an investigation under the PMLA, 2002, based on a First Information Report (FIR) registered against AR Dairy Food Pvt Ltd and others. It is alleged that the accused persons, in conspiracy with certain TTD officials, committed criminal breach of trust, cheating, and caused wrongful loss to TTD by supplying adulterated ghee.
ED said its investigation conducted so far has revealed that the 'Proceeds of Crime generated through the supply of adulterated ghee to TTD were subsequently invested in immovable properties through a complex web of interconnected legal entities and business concerns to conceal the illicit origin of funds.' (ANI) ghee adulteration investigation alleged India, Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams ghee adulteration fraud case prov:wasAssociatedWith Pomil Jain residential and office premises of Pomil Jain Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams ghee adulteration fraud case prov:wasAssociatedWith Vipin Jain premises of Pomil Jain, Vipin Jain Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams ghee adulteration fraud case prov:wasAssociatedWith Raju Rajasekaran premises of Pomil Jain, Vipin Jain, Raju Rajasekaran Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams ghee adulteration fraud case prov:wasAssociatedWith Apurva Vinaykanth Chavda premises of Pomil Jain, Vipin Jain, Raju Rajasekaran, Rajesh Mansukhlal Chavda, Apurva Vinaykanth Chavda Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams ghee adulteration fraud case prov:wasAssociatedWith Ajay Kumar Sugandh premises of Pomil Jain, Vipin Jain, Raju Rajasekaran, Rajesh Mansukhlal Chavda, Apurva Vinaykanth Chavda, Machindra Shantaram Lanke, Ajay Kumar Sugandh supply of adulterated ghee to TTD prov:wasAssociatedWith AR Dairy Food Pvt Ltd supplying adulterated ghee ghee adulteration fraud prov:used ghee supplying adulterated ghee supply of adulterated ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith AR Dairy Food Pvt Ltd supplying adulterated ghee AR Dairy Food Pvt Ltd fflo:foundAt Dindigul AR Dairy Food Pvt Ltd in Dindigul Malganga Milk and Agro Products Pvt Ltd fflo:foundAt Ahilyanagar Malganga Milk and Agro Products Pvt Ltd in Ahilyanagar Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Milk Pvt Ltd fflo:foundAt Roorkee Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Milk Pvt Ltd in Roorkee19:Tb93,TTD ghee scam: ED conducts multi-city searches thehindu.com The Enforcement Directorate (ED) on Monday conducted searches at 15 locations across Ahilyanagar, Bikaner, Dehradun, Delhi, Dindigul, Guntur, Mumbai, and Roorkee in connection with the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) ghee adulteration case.
According to an official release, the ED’s Hyderabad Zonal Office carried out searches at the residential and office premises of Pomil Jain, Vipin Jain, Raju Rajasekaran, Rajesh Mansukhlal Chavda, Apurva Vinaykanth Chavda, Machindra Shantaram Lanke, Ajay Kumar Sugandh, Mahesh Kumar Rohira, and Ashish Agarwal.
During the searches, cash amounting to ₹60 lakh was seized. The searches also led to disclosures regarding investments of Proceeds of Crime (PoC) in properties valued at more than ₹45 crore, along with details of several immovable properties held in the names of the accused persons and their family members.
The searches also covered the dairy plants of A.R. Dairy Food Pvt. Ltd., Dindigul; Malganga Milk & Agro Products Pvt. Ltd., Ahilyanagar; and Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Milk Pvt. Ltd., Roorkee.
Various incriminating documents were seized, indicating the use of a complex network of legal entities to facilitate bogus sale and purchase transactions for concealment and layering of Proceeds of Crime.
The ED initiated the investigation under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA), 2002, based on an FIR registered against M/s A.R. Dairy Food Pvt. Ltd. and others. It is alleged that the accused persons, in conspiracy with certain TTD officials, committed criminal breach of trust, cheating, and caused wrongful loss to the TTD by supplying adulterated ghee.
Investigation conducted so far have revealed that the proceeds of crime generated from the alleged supply of adulterated ghee to the TTD were subsequently invested in immovable properties through a complex web of interconnected legal entities and businesses to conceal the illicit origin of funds.
Further investigation is under way, the ED said.
Published - June 03, 2026 09:37 pm IST ghee adulteration substitution contamination search_and_seizure investigation alleged India TTD ghee adulteration case prov:wasAssociatedWith Pomil Jain The Enforcement Directorate (ED) on Monday conducted searches at 15 locations across Ahilyanagar, Bikaner, Dehradun, Delhi, Dindigul, Guntur, Mumbai, and Roorkee in connection with the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) ghee adulteration case. According to an official release, the ED’s Hyderabad Zonal Office carried out searches at the residential and office premises of Pomil Jain ghee fflo:hasAdulterant adulterated substance supplying adulterated ghee supply of adulterated ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith TTD officials accused persons, in conspiracy with certain TTD officials Enforcement Directorate prov:wasAssociatedWith investigation under PMLA ED initiated the investigation under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act1a:T2815,Study reveals â_x0080__x0098_fake gheeâ_x0080__x0099_ from carrot extract can pass quality tests â_x0080__x0094_ but is it really healthier than real ghee? indiatimes.com For Indian families, ghee isnât just one ingredient in the food sitting in our kitchen or at the dining table â itâs part of culture, lore, rituals, Ayurveda, and daily life. This makes ghee adulteration one of the countryâs most stubborn food fraud issues.
In todayâs time, âfakeâ ghee remains one of India's most persistent food fraud problems. As the price of pure dairy ghee continues to climb, manufacturers and sellers often look for cheaper substitutes such as vegetable oils, vanaspati, palm oil, and other fats to increase profits.
Now, researchers at IIT (Banaras Hindu University) recently uncovered something strange: carrot extract can help fake ghee pass certain quality tests, making adulteration harder to spot.
So, if carrot extract fools the tests, does that mean fake ghee is healthy?
Letâs unpack.
What does the research say?
In a new study, 
researchers at the Indian Institute of Technology, Banaras Hindu University (IIT-BHU), found that carrot extract might help fake ghee slip past some quality tests, making it even tougher to spot the real deal from clever imitations. This study speaks to just how crafty food adulteration has become, and needless to say, it is quite worrisome. Because it's not just about mixing in cheap fats anymore â fraudsters are now using natural ingredients to tweak the way fake ghee looks and acts during tests, so it passes as genuine.
Thereâs no denying that making true ghee is costly, as pure ghee takes a ton of milk fat, which doesnât come cheap. So thereâs always been a strong temptation to cheat. People have so far mixed in vanaspati, vegetable oils, palm or coconut oil, cottonseed oil, or other cheap fats, but slapped a "pure ghee" label on the container.
But now, IIT-BHU researchers have found that carrot extract can mess with those test results, making doctored samples look more like real ghee. Itâs not that carrots themselves are bad or harmful for you; the worry is that this kind of natural masking agent can throw off even reliable checks, which puts regulators in a tight spot.
But how did the researchers find carrot extract in âfake gheeâ?
Throughout the food industry, fraudsters are always finding new ways to stay one step ahead. To fight back, scientists are turning to next-gen tools like Raman spectroscopy, chromatography, machine learning, and computer vision. Unlike traditional screening, spectroscopic methods can catch palm oil at much lower concentrations, really raising the bar for catching fraud.
So, this IIT-BHU study fits right into a larger race, as scientists are working to outpace the latest tricks in food faking.
And this isnât just a lab issue. Thereâs been no shortage of ghee scandals in India lately. Investigations have exposed shady procurement practices and revealed all-too-common vegetable fat contamination, even in brands sold as âpure ghee.â
What about the impact on health?
When you look at the health impact, it comes down to whatâs getting mixed in. Vanaspati, a hydrogenated fat made to mimic dairy, still shows up often. Even though new rules have cut industrial trans fats, vanaspati is still different from the real thing. Scientists point out that hydrogenated fats, overall, have been tied to more heart risks and other health issues.
Other fakes, like palm oil, refined veggie oils, and synthetic blends, arenât necessarily toxic, but theyâre still cheating the customer. People buying âgenuineâ ghee end up with something thatâs not the same, especially when you look at nutrition. The difference is real.
So now, if carrot extract fools the tests, does that mean fake ghee is healthy?
The answer to that question isnât exactly linear.
Traditional quality checks rely on chemical and physical differences between real milk fat and cheaper substitutes. Adding natural carrot extract changes the color and antioxidant profile, making adulterated fat look more authentic. This complicates things for regulators and testing labs trying to weed out fraud.
Now, adulteration is getting more complex. Over the years, studies have shown that fraudsters use a mix of vegetable oils, hydrogenated fats, and blended oils, crafted especially to avoid detection by standard tests. Thatâs why scientists have developed advanced options (like FTIR spectroscopy, chromatography, machine learning, and AI) to catch new tricks.
But hereâs what stands out from the IIT-BHU study: carrot extract isnât dangerous by itself. The problem isnât the ingredient, but how itâs used to hide food fraud.
Carrot extract is loaded with beta-carotene and antioxidants, and carrots have vitamin A precursors, so theyâre fine to eat. But adding carrot extract to a mix of cheap fats doesnât turn fake ghee into a healthy food. If the base is vegetable oil or hydrogenated fat, carrot extract is only there to make it look like real ghee. You arenât getting the nutrition you expect.
Real ghee has milk-fat components, fat-soluble vitamins, short-chain fatty acids (like butyrate), and a unique fatty-acid profile. Even though ghee must be eaten in moderation (itâs high in calories and saturated fat), itâs still a very different thing from an adulterated product.
It gets worse when the substitute is vanaspati or hydrogenated vegetable fat. These can be loaded with industrial trans fats, which is bad news for heart health, inflammation, and metabolism. Hydrogenated oil is one of the most common adulterants because itâs cheap and mimics gheeâs texture.
So, a ânaturalâ fake ghee with carrot extract might look convincing, but itâs still nutritionally inferior. Because ânaturalâ is not the same as âhealthy.â
Many people mistake color for quality. Real ghee changes color depending on cow feed, season, milk source, and method. Some genuine ghee is deep yellow, some pale gold, some almost white. Color alone doesnât mean purity.
The IIT-BHU study, in fact, exposes a bigger challenge for food safety officials. As cheats get smarter, regulators need high-tech testing â not just basic screening. New spectroscopic and AI-powered tools can pinpoint adulteration as low as 1â2%, beating old methods.
As for buyers, itâs advisable to keep in mind that while carrot extract isnât bad by itself, if itâs there to hide fraud, fake ghee is still fake, and not healthier than real dairy ghee. The real issue here is authenticity. People expect ghee to be genuine milk fat, not a cleverly disguised mix. Whether the disguise is artificial or natural, the nutritional and ethical concerns stay the same. ghee adulteration research pending_test India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant carrot extract carrot extract can help fake ghee pass certain quality tests hydrogenated fats fflo:causesEffect heart risks hydrogenated fats, overall, have been tied to more heart risks hydrogenated fats fflo:causesEffect health issues hydrogenated fats, overall, have been tied to more heart risks and other health issues ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable fat revealed all-too-common vegetable fat contamination, even in brands sold as âpure ghee.â carrot extract fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee carrot extract is only there to make it look like real ghee vegetable oils fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee If the base is vegetable oil or hydrogenated fat, carrot extract is only there to make it look like real ghee ghee fkg:hasIngredient milk-fat Real ghee has milk-fat components ghee fkg:hasIngredient fat-soluble vitamins Real ghee has milk-fat components, fat-soluble vitamins ghee fkg:hasIngredient butyrate Real ghee has milk-fat components, fat-soluble vitamins, short-chain fatty acids (like butyrate), and a unique fatty-acid profile. industrial trans fats fflo:causesEffect inflammation loaded with industrial trans fats, which is bad news for heart health, inflammation hydrogenated oil fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee Hydrogenated oil is one of the most common adulterants because itâs cheap and mimics gheeâs texture ghee fkg:hasIngredient milk fat People expect ghee to be genuine milk fat ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable oils manufacturers and sellers often look for cheaper substitutes such as vegetable oils ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil cheaper substitutes such as vegetable oils, vanaspati, palm oil vegetable oils fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee cheaper substitutes such as vegetable oils palm oil fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee cheaper substitutes such as vegetable oils, vanaspati, palm oil ghee adulteration fflo:hasFraudType Substitution manufacturers and sellers often look for cheaper substitutes using carrot extract to pass quality tests fflo:hasFraudType Masking using natural ingredients to tweak the way fake ghee looks and acts during tests ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vanaspati mixed in vanaspati, vegetable oils, palm or coconut oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable oils mixed in vanaspati, vegetable oils, palm or coconut oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil mixed in vanaspati, vegetable oils, palm or coconut oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant coconut oil mixed in vanaspati, vegetable oils, palm or coconut oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant cottonseed oil cottonseed oil, or other cheap fats carrot extract fflo:causesEffect masking adulteration natural masking agent can throw off even reliable checks masking adulteration fflo:hasFraudType Masking natural masking agent can throw off even reliable checks palm oil fflo:detectedBy Raman spectroscopy spectroscopic methods can catch palm oil at much lower concentrations palm oil fflo:detectedBy chromatography tools like Raman spectroscopy, chromatography, machine learning ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vanaspati Vanaspati, a hydrogenated fat made to mimic dairy, still shows up often. ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil Other fakes, like palm oil, refined veggie oils, and synthetic blends ghee fflo:hasAdulterant synthetic blends Other fakes, like palm oil, refined veggie oils, and synthetic blends ghee fflo:hasAdulterant hydrogenated vegetable fat Hydrogenated oil is one of the most common adulterants industrial trans fats fflo:causesEffect heart health issues industrial trans fats, which is bad news for heart health1b:T1354,Carrot extract can make fake ghee dodge quality test: study thehindu.com Guwahati
The red-orange pigment from carrots can make fake ghee dodge a popular quality test to pass off as a premium product sourced from cows, a new study has found.
Researchers from the Indian Institute of Technology (Banaras Hindu University) in Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, have demonstrated that non-dairy fats, such as palm oil and lard or rendered pig fat, can be engineered to mimic the Raman spectral signature of authentic cow ghee simply by adding a beta-carotene-rich carrot extract.
Cow ghee naturally contains beta-carotene, responsible for its yellowish colour. The researchers are Vineet Sharma, Ajay Kumar Bind, Shreyans K. Jain, and Venkatanarayan Ramanathan. Their study has been published in the latest issue of the Journal of Raman Spectroscopy.
The findings, although based on a small sample size, raise concerns about fraud in India’s premium dairy market. They also challenge the efficacy of Raman spectroscopy, a rapid testing technique widely used by food regulators and laboratories.
Named after Nobel laureate C.V. Raman, Raman spectroscopy is considered a powerful analytical quality test. It acts as a molecular fingerprint to verify the exact chemical composition, crystalline structure, and purity of a substance.
The IIT (BHU) team investigated whether the characteristic Raman signatures associated with cow ghee could be artificially recreated with other fats.
Previous studies have treated three Raman spectral peaks of beta-carotene — at 1,006, 1,157, and 1,520 cm−1 — as reliable markers for authenticating cow ghee. These peaks are often absent in non-dairy fats.
To test the robustness of these markers, the researchers fortified samples of lard and palm oil with carotenoids extracted from carrots. Both lard and palm oil displayed the same Raman peaks traditionally attributed to cow ghee.
The fortified fats also acquired the yellow-orange colour similar to cow ghee, making them resemble the dairy product in appearance and spectroscopic profile.
The team conducted another experiment using lard. A master mixture containing carotenoid extract was progressively diluted to determine the minimum concentration at which the characteristic Raman signals remained visible. They found that carotenoid markers could still be detected at concentrations as low as 0.22 milligrams per gram of lard, equivalent to 0.022% by weight.
Additional test
While Raman spectroscopy clearly detected the added carotenoids, a complementary analysis using Attenuated Total Reflectance Fourier Transform Infrared (ATR-FTIR) spectroscopy showed little change in the underlying lipid composition of the fats. The FTIR spectra remained dominated by the signatures of lard and palm oil, indicating that the resemblance to cow ghee arose primarily from the added pigments rather than any transformation of the fats.
The researchers said their study was designed as an “anti-fraud proof-of-concept” to highlight weaknesses in current screening processes and not to examine the adulteration of genuine ghee with other fats.
They said Raman spectroscopy was indispensable in detecting the beta-carotene peaks, but “compromise is inevitable” if it is solely relied upon for the authentication of cow ghee. “This vulnerability has severe ramifications in consumer protection and market integrity where cow ghee carries not only high economic value but also harbours immense sociocultural sensitivity,” they noted.
Published - May 31, 2026 08:00 pm IST ghee adulteration dilution substitution carrot extract palm oil lard suspected Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod adding carrot extract to mask Raman signature mimic the Raman spectral signature of authentic cow ghee simply by adding a beta-carotene-rich carrot extract lard fflo:hasAdulterant carotenoids fortified samples of lard and palm oil with carotenoids extracted from carrots carotenoids fflo:detectedBy Raman spectroscopy Raman spectroscopy clearly detected the added carotenoids Raman spectroscopy fflo:producesIndicator beta-carotene peaks Raman spectroscopy was indispensable in detecting the beta-carotene peaks lard fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee non-dairy fats, such as palm oil and lard Raman spectroscopy fflo:producesIndicator molecular fingerprint It acts as a molecular fingerprint to verify the exact chemical composition ATR-FTIR spectroscopy fflo:producesIndicator lipid composition signatures FTIR spectra remained dominated by the signatures of lard and palm oil lard fflo:hasAdulterant carrot extract fortified samples of lard and palm oil with carotenoids extracted from carrots palm oil fflo:hasAdulterant carrot extract fortified samples of lard and palm oil with carotenoids extracted from carrots carotenoids extracted from carrots fflo:isSubstituteFor cow ghee fortified samples of lard and palm oil with carotenoids extracted from carrots1c:T98d,Nashik FDA confiscates food items worth over Rs 1 lakh on suspicion of adulteration indiatimes.com Nashik: Food articles worth over ₹1 lakh were seized in a series of raids carried out by the Nashik Food and Drug Administration (FDA) across multiple locations on May 27, targeting suspected adulterated and unlicensed food businesses.
The crackdown began in the Nashik Road area, where officials, acting on specific information, raided a shop found operating without a valid licence. During the inspection, the team seized and sealed 1,584 bottles of two brands of caffeinated beverages and energy drinks, valued at over Rs 31,000, on suspicion of adulteration.
On the same day, the FDA conducted multiple raids across the district. At a snack shop in Panchavati, food items worth over Rs 13,000 were sealed, while in a separate action, soyabean oil stock valued at Rs 68,000 was seized. In Trimbakeshwar, paneer worth Rs 3,200 was sealed, and further raids in Igatpuri and Sinnar led to the seizure of sweetened carbonated drinks worth over Rs 2,400.
Senior FDA officers said the drive is part of a broader effort to clamp down on adulterated and substandard food products. They added that, acting on instructions from top officials, the department has begun gathering intelligence on businesses involved in such activities.
The seized food items remain in the custody of the respective traders, while samples have been sent for laboratory analysis. Joint commissioner Shrikant Karkale, who holds charge of the Nashik FDA, warned that strict action will follow if violations are confirmed.
“If the samples are found to be substandard or adulterated, strict legal action will be taken against the traders under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006,” he said, adding that the crackdown will continue in the future. soyabean oil substandard adulteration seizure suspected Nashik, Maharashtra, India laboratory analysis fso:isPerformedOn samples samples have been sent for laboratory analysis seizure of caffeinated beverages fflo:targets caffeinated beverages seized and sealed 1,584 bottles of two brands of caffeinated beverages seizure of soyabean oil fflo:targets soyabean oil soyabean oil stock valued at Rs 68,000 was seized paneer fflo:foundAt Trimbakeshwar In Trimbakeshwar, paneer worth Rs 3,200 was sealed Nashik FDA prov:wasAssociatedWith Shrikant Karkale Joint commissioner Shrikant Karkale, who holds charge of the Nashik FDA1d:Tf6c,Rajasthan Raid Uncovers Thousands Of Litres Of Adulterated Ghee rediff.com In Udaipur, Rajasthan, a significant raid uncovered approximately 18,000 litres of adulterated ghee, highlighting ongoing concerns about food safety and the importance of regulatory oversight.
Key Points
- Authorities seized 18,000 litres of suspected adulterated ghee in Udaipur, Rajasthan.
- The raid was conducted following complaints about food adulteration and product quality at Shri Madhur Dairy Farm.
- Yellow food colour was found on the premises, allegedly used to misrepresent the ghee as cow ghee.
- Samples have been sent to the state food laboratory for testing under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006.
- The sale and distribution of the seized ghee have been banned to protect public health.
Around 18,000 litres of suspected adulterated ghee (clarified butter) and yellow food colour were seized during a raid in Rajasthan's Udaipur, officials said on Saturday.
Acting on complaints related to food adulteration and product quality, a central enforcement team of the Food Safety Commissionerate carried out joint inspections at two locations in the district.
Ghee Manufacturing Under Scrutiny
Food Safety Commissioner Dr T Shubhamangala said the team inspected Shri Madhur Dairy Farm and Food Products, where ghee was being manufactured and stored under multiple brands, including "Udaipur Fresh Desi Ghee", "Udaipur Fresh Cow Ghee", "Madhya Desi Ghee" and "Jayant Cow Ghee".
The officials said they found large quantities of ghee stored in tanks and containers, besides several tins without proper labels or mandatory product details, in violation of food safety regulations.
Yellow Food Colour Found On Premises
During the inspection, bottles of yellow food colour were also recovered from the premises. Preliminary findings suggest the colour was being mixed into ghee allegedly to market it as cow ghee, officials said.
Samples have been collected and sent to the state food laboratory for scientific testing under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006.
Sale And Distribution Banned
Keeping public health concerns in view, the authorities seized about 18,000 litres of ghee on the spot and banned its sale and distribution.
During the drive, another private company was also inspected, where a stock of over 42,000 kg of ghee, butter and other dairy products of various brands was found. Detailed investigation into the stock is underway, officials added. ghee adulteration seizure ban suspected Udaipur, Rajasthan, India, Udaipur, Rajasthan ghee fflo:hasAdulterant yellow food colour Yellow food colour was found on the premises, allegedly used to misrepresent the ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod Addition of yellow food colour Yellow food colour was found on the premises, allegedly used to misrepresent the ghee ghee fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy ghee, butter and other dairy products Adulteration of ghee with yellow food colour prov:wasAssociatedWith Shri Madhur Dairy Farm complaints about food adulteration and product quality at Shri Madhur Dairy Farm yellow food colour fflo:isSubstituteFor cow ghee allegedly used to misrepresent the ghee as cow ghee yellow food colour fflo:foundAt Processing Yellow food colour was found on the premises yellow food colour fflo:foundAt Storage ghee was being manufactured and stored ghee fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy adulterated ghee (clarified butter) Addition of yellow food colour fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling allegedly used to misrepresent the ghee as cow ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant yellow food colour colour was being mixed into ghee Yellow Food Colour fflo:foundAt ghee colour was being mixed into ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod mixing yellow food colour colour was being mixed into ghee mixing yellow food colour fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling market it as cow ghee omitting mandatory product details fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling without proper labels or mandatory product details1e:T76e,76-year-old held for selling adulterated desi ghee in Devbhumi Dwarka indiatimes.com Rajkot:  In a crackdown on the illegal sale of adulterated food items, the Special Operations Group (SOG) of Devbhumi Dwarka police apprehended a 76-year-old woman for allegedly selling fake desi ghee.
Acting on specific intelligence during patrolling in the Salaya Marine police station area, police received inputs that adulterated desi ghee mixed with chemicals was being sold near the Salaya Panjrapole gate, posing a serious risk to public health.
An SOG team rushed to the location and detained the suspect, identified as Maya Vakatar, a resident of Khambhalia. Officials said she was found in possession of a substantial quantity of the suspected counterfeit ghee.
Following the seizure, the food inspector was called to the spot. Preliminary on-site testing was conducted, after which samples of the adulterated product were collected for further laboratory analysis.
The remaining stock, around 9kg of ghee valued at approximately Rs 2,700, was destroyed on the spot to prevent any potential harm to consumers, officials said. ghee adulteration chemicals apprehended detained seizure destroyed alleged Devbhumi Dwarka, Gujarat, India desi ghee fflo:hasAdulterant chemicals adulterated desi ghee mixed with chemicals Adulteration of desi ghee in Devbhumi Dwarka prov:wasAssociatedWith Maya Vakatar apprehended a 76-year-old woman for allegedly selling fake desi ghee Adulteration of desi ghee in Devbhumi Dwarka prov:used desi ghee selling fake desi ghee Adulteration of desi ghee in Devbhumi Dwarka prov:wasAssociatedWith Maya Vakatar detained the suspect, identified as Maya Vakatar Finding of adulterated desi ghee fflo:producedBy Preliminary on-site testing Preliminary on-site testing was conducted Finding of adulterated desi ghee fflo:foundIn desi ghee samples of the adulterated product were collected1f:Ta9b,Fake ghee racket busted in Surat, raw material worth Rs 3 lakh seized in Kamrej raid indiatimes.com SURAT: A fake ghee manufacturing racket operating from a warehouse in Kamrej taluka was busted by Surat Rural police on Wednesday, with the local crime branch (LCB) seizing raw material and machinery worth about Rs 3 lakh, bringing into focus food safety risks consumers in South Gujarat face.
An LCB team raided the premises of Araydhya Marketing and Dairy Products at Navagam, where spurious ghee was allegedly being produced and packaged.
Officers seized 25 containers of 15kg each filled with vegetable oil, seven containers of 15kg each containing palm oil, three containers of fake ghee and equipment used in the process.
Investigators said the ghee was prepared by mixing palm oil and vegetable oil and then packaged and sold as pure cow ghee.
Police identified the accused as Kiran Modi, 40, a resident of Sumul Dairy Road, who was apprehended at the spot. On being interrogated, Modi said he had obtained a licence from the food and drugs department in 2021 to manufacture ghee and had been using the warehouse for three years.
A Food and Drugs Control Administration (FDCA) team was called to the site, and officials took samples of the seized material for laboratory testing. 
Police said further legal action will follow after the test reports are received.
âThe adulterated product was being marketed as genuine cow ghee to mislead consumers. Samples of the seized material have been sent to the Forensic Science Laboratory for testing, and the results will reveal their actual content. Based on the findings, further action will be taken against those involved,â said N G Panchani, police inspector, LCB, Surat. ghee adulteration substitution vegetable oil palm oil raid seizure sample collection alleged Surat, Gujarat, India vegetable oil fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee mixing palm oil and vegetable oil and then packaged and sold as pure cow ghee palm oil fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee mixing palm oil and vegetable oil and then packaged and sold as pure cow ghee Fake ghee manufacturing racket prov:used vegetable oil ghee was prepared by mixing palm oil and vegetable oil Fake ghee manufacturing racket prov:used palm oil ghee was prepared by mixing palm oil and vegetable oil Mixing palm oil and vegetable oil fflo:hasFraudType Substitution ghee was prepared by mixing palm oil and vegetable oil mixing palm oil and vegetable oil fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional ghee was prepared by mixing palm oil and vegetable oil and then packaged and sold as pure cow ghee palm oil fflo:foundAt Processing ghee was prepared by mixing palm oil and vegetable oil ghee fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy genuine cow ghee20:T9c1,Food safety raids at Hyderabad bakery, brewery uncover expired food, pest infestation, hygiene violations thehindu.com Food safety inspections conducted by the Telangana Food Safety department at a bakery and a brewery in Hyderabad’s Nagole area on Wednesday (May 20) uncovered serious hygiene and food safety violations, with officials finding pest infestation, expired food products and suspected reuse of cooking oil at two establishments.
According to a press note issued by the department, inspections at Urban Monk Fine Dine and Baking in LB Nagar and Meld Haus brewery in Nagole revealed multiple violations. Officials found expired and mislabelled food products, improper food storage practices, poor sanitary conditions and suspected repeated use of cooking oil at the premises.
In a separate inspection in Karimnagar, officials detected serious violations at Ganesh Bangalore Bakery in Subhash Nagar. Food Safety officers found 750 damaged eggs that were foul-smelling and infested with houseflies. Authorities also discarded 20 kg of cakes suspected to have been prepared using the spoiled eggs.
“Expired and spoiled food articles, along with suspected reused cooking oil, were discarded on the spot during the inspections. Enforcement samples were collected from the establishments and sent for laboratory analysis,” the department said.
They further added that necessary action is being initiated against the Food Business Operators concerned under the provisions of the Food Safety and Standards Act.
Published - May 21, 2026 12:10 am IST cooking oil adulteration reused cooking oil necessary action suspected Hyderabad, Telangana, India laboratory analysis fso:isPerformedOn enforcement samples Enforcement samples were collected from the establishments and sent for laboratory analysis Food Business Operators fflo:compliesWith Food Safety and Standards Act action is being initiated against the Food Business Operators concerned under the provisions of the Food Safety and Standards Act Ganesh Bangalore Bakery prov:wasAssociatedWith use of spoiled eggs prepared using the spoiled eggs cooking oil fflo:hasAdulterant reused cooking oil suspected reuse of cooking oil cakes fflo:hasAdulterant spoiled eggs prepared using the spoiled eggs necessary action fflo:issuedBy Telangana Food Safety department necessary action is being initiated against the Food Business Operators finding expired food products fflo:foundAtStep Retail finding pest infestation, expired food products21:T64c,4,000 litres of suspected adulterated oil seized | Kanpur News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Kanpur: Police seized around 4,000 litres of suspected adulterated edible oil during a raid near Mantora Bridge in industrial area of Kanpur Dehat on Friday.
According to police, the raid was carried out after authorities received information that adulterated oil was being illegally stored on a vacant plot located between Premnagar and Mantora Bridge. The operation was led by surveillance in-charge Praveen Yadav, SOG in-charge JP Sharma and Raniya police station head Dinesh Gautam along with police personnel.
The team recovered 20 drums containing nearly 4,000 litres of loil from the site. Officials suspect that the oil may have been stored for illegal adulteration and distribution purposes.
Following the recovery, officials from the food and logistics department were called to the spot. Samples of the suspected oil were collected and sent to a laboratory for testing to determine its quality and composition.
Police said the seized oil has been taken into custody and further legal action will be initiated after the laboratory examination report is received.
ASP Alok Prasad said a district-wide campaign against adulteration and illegal food-related activities is currently underway and strict action would be taken against those found involved in such offences. edible oil adulteration substandard seizure custody suspected Kanpur, Kanpur Dehat, Uttar Pradesh, India suspected oil sample fflo:collectedAt vacant plot between Premnagar and Mantora Bridge Samples of the suspected oil were collected22:Td07,Another High-Level Committee Constituted on Tirumala Laddu Ghee Row deccanchronicle.com The committee has been directed to submit its report within one week from the date of issuance of the order
TIRUPATI: The state government has constituted a high-level committee to examine and implement the recommendations of the one-man commission that probed the alleged adulteration of ghee used in the preparation of Srivari laddu prasadam at Tirumala.
Chief Secretary G. Sai Prasad issued G.O. No. 900 on Thursday appointing the committee to study the findings and recommendations of the one-man probe into procurement and quality issues relating to ghee supplied to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams.
The government had earlier constituted the one-man commission, headed by retired IAS officer Dinesh Kumar through G.O. No. 458 on February 20, 2026. The commission submitted its report to the government on April 24, 2026. According to the G.O. 900, the commission report highlighted systemic deficiencies, procedural lapses, and accountability issues in the procurement process. It made several recommendations for corrective measures.
The commission observed that tender conditions strengthened in 2019 to ensure quality and supplier eligibility had later been diluted without proper justification. The report also pointed to lapses in scrutiny of complaints, acceptance of abnormally low bids, and failure to enforce food safety norms. It flagged the suppression of a 2022 laboratory report by the Central Food Technological Research Institute that allegedly indicated adulteration in ghee samples.
The panel stated that more than 70 lakh kg of ghee used in preparation of laddus had been procured without mandatory quality testing. The commission described this as a systemic failure. The panel reportedly recommended reforms in procurement and governance systems, including strengthening quality-control mechanisms, mandatory laboratory testing of consignments, vendor empanelment, improved vigilance oversight, and transparency in disclosure of test reports and supplier details.
The high-level committee constituted by the government on Thursday will be headed by the AP Chief Secretary. The Director General of Police (HoPF) will be a member, while the Secretary (Law Department) will serve as member-convener.
The government has directed the committee to examine the findings and recommendations of the one-man commission from the perspective of actionable outcomes and recommend administrative, disciplinary, and legal action wherever necessary.
The panel has been asked to prepare a prioritised implementation plan with timelines and suggest a monitoring mechanism for effective implementation of the decisions taken by the government.
The committee has been directed to submit its report within one week from the date of issuance of the order. ghee adulteration prohibited_additive substandard unknown committee_formation alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India adulteration in ghee samples fflo:foundIn ghee indicated adulteration in ghee samples adulteration in ghee samples fflo:producedBy 2022 laboratory report suppression of a 2022 laboratory report... that allegedly indicated adulteration in ghee samples failure to enforce food safety norms fflo:violates food safety norms failure to enforce food safety norms23:Tb40,Hyderabad: Food safety inspection flags unsafe oil at KFC outlet in Kondapur siasat.com Hyderabad: A food safety inspection has flagged violations related to cooking oil quality at a KFC outlet in Kondapur.
According to food safety authorities, a team conducted a random inspection at the outlet located in Rajarajeshwari Colony. During the inspection, the Total Polar Compounds (TPC) levels in the cooking oil were found to be above the permissible limits.
Officials also observed dark discolouration in the oil, indicating repeated use beyond prescribed safety standards. Action is being initiated against the outlet under relevant provisions of food safety regulations.
TPC levels are used to assess the degradation of cooking oil, and exceeding the prescribed limit is considered unsafe for consumption. Officials said such violations can pose health risks if not addressed.
Food raids in Hyderabad
Hyderabad has witnessed a series of food safety inspections in recent months, with authorities intensifying checks across restaurants, cloud kitchens and food outlets. Several establishments in Hyderabad, including well-known chains like the KFC, have been flagged for violations such as reuse of cooking oil, poor hygiene and improper storage practices.
In recent inspections across the city, officials have identified issues ranging from expired food items to lack of proper monitoring of oil quality. Notices and penalties have been issued in multiple cases.
The enforcement drives are being carried out under the guidelines of the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) to ensure compliance with safety norms.
Authorities have advised food business operators to strictly adhere to prescribed standards, particularly regarding oil reuse and hygiene, while consumers have been urged to report concerns related to food quality. cooking oil unsafe_food substandard Action is being initiated against the outlet suspected Hyderabad, Telangana, India safety norms lkif:created_by Food Safety and Standards Authority of India guidelines of the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) to ensure compliance with safety norms TPC violation finding prov:wasAttributedTo KFC outlet in Kondapur flagged violations related to cooking oil quality at a KFC outlet TPC violation finding fflo:foundIn cooking oil Total Polar Compounds (TPC) levels in the cooking oil were found TPC levels found above permissible limits fflo:constitutes TPC limit violation Total Polar Compounds (TPC) levels in the cooking oil were found to be above the permissible limits TPC limit violation fflo:violates TPC permissible limit above the permissible limits SensoryTest fflo:producesIndicator dark discolouration Officials also observed dark discolouration in the oil TPC violation finding fflo:triggeredAction Action against KFC outlet Action is being initiated against the outlet24:Tbef,TTD Board Meeting Tomorrow; May Discuss Ghee Panel Report, Seek Action deccanchronicle.com TTD Board member and BJP leader G. Bhanu Prakash Reddy said he would raise the issue during the board meeting
TIRUPATI: A meeting of the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) Trust Board is scheduled on Wednesday. It is expected to discuss the findings of the one-man commission on allegedly adulterated ghee supplies. A resolution seeking action against former officials responsible for the adulteration is likely to be placed before the board.
TTD Board member and BJP leader G. Bhanu Prakash Reddy said he would raise the issue during the board meeting. He cited the report of the commission headed by retired IAS officer Dinesh Kumar pointing to lapses at various levels, leading to the procurement of substandard ghee. Bhanu Prakash Reddy named former TTD executive officer (EO) Anil Kumar Singhal, former additional executive officer A.V. Dharma Reddy, and former TTD Board chairmen Y.V. Subba Reddy and Bhumana Karunakar Reddy for allowing lapses in procurement of ghee. The TTD Board member said relaxation of procurement norms resulted in supply of inferior quality ghee. He reiterated that the Board will discuss the one-man commission’s findings and consider a resolution seeking action against those found responsible.
There is likely to be a detailed discussion on maintaining quality standards in preparation of Srivari laddu prasadam at Lord Venkateswara Swamy Temple in Tirumala. The controversy dates back to allegations made during the previous government led by Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy. A Special Investigation Team (SIT) had earlier examined the matter, and the state government later constituted the one-man committee to review the SIT findings. The panel has since submitted its report. In addition to the committee report, the TTD Board is expected to discuss measures to improve pilgrim amenities and strengthen infrastructure in Tirumala in view of the increasing number of devotees. The proposal to rename the four Mada streets around the Tirumala Temple after the four Vedas is likely to be taken up.
Other streets in Tirumala may be named after saint-composers, such as Annamacharya, Ramadasu, Purandaradasa and Tarigonda Vengamamba, apart from temple servitors like Tirumala Nambi and Ananthalwar. The TTD Trust Board is also expected to consider renaming localities such as Mullagunta, RBC Centre, and Medaramitta after revered saints. Other proposals on the agenda are developing a township at Alipiri in Tirupati and modernising Kalyani Satram in Tirumala to improve accommodation facilities for devotees. ghee adulteration substandard ghee board meeting to discuss findings alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India substandard ghee fflo:foundAt procurement leading to the procurement of substandard ghee adulteration of ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith TTD allegedly adulterated ghee supplies adulteration of ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhumana Karunakar Reddy Bhumana Karunakar Reddy for allowing lapses in procurement of ghee25:T1b04,Admin failures, procedural violations led to TTD ghee adulteration, says one-man panel newindianexpress.com VIJAYAWADA: In a major development in the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) ghee adulteration scandal, the findings of the One-Man Committee constituted by Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu have come to light, exposing a deep-rooted nexus of administrative failures, procedural violations, and possible collusion that enabled the supply of adulterated ghee used in Srivari laddu prasadam.
The committee, headed by retired IAS officer Dinesh Kumar (1983 batch), was tasked with identifying those responsible for the scandal and examining lapses in the procurement system. Its report squarely fixes accountability on senior officials and the procurement machinery, holding them responsible for creating conditions that allowed adulterated ghee to enter the sacred supply chain.
The committee’s mandate was confined to governance and administrative responsibility, not criminal liability, as a police case had already been registered in Tirupati East Police Station (Crime No. 470/2024).
The report highlights how the eligibility criteria introduced in August 2019 were diluted within five months without justification, enabling non-compliant and unverified dairy firms to participate in ghee tenders. This relaxation opened the door for suppliers such as Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Milk Pvt Ltd, whose entry marked the beginning of a decline in quality standards.
Procurement was driven by unsustainable lowest-price (L1) bidding, with reductions up to Rs 207 per kg incentivising adulteration. In several cases, post-auction negotiations were permitted in violation of tender rules, further undermining transparency.
A critical CFTRI laboratory report dated August 3, 2022, confirmed adulteration with vegetable oils through the presence of β-Sitosterol. However, senior management suppressed the findings and failed to enforce Tender Condition No. 50, which mandated blacklisting of such firms. Instead, suppliers continued to receive orders, and procurement went on unchecked.
Plans to mandate FSSAI β-Sitosterol testing from July 2022 were reversed, resulting in the procurement of over 70 lakh kg of ghee without legally required checks. The report notes that consignments were accepted and used even before laboratory results were received, raising serious concerns about public health and the sanctity of temple offerings.
The TTD Food and Water Laboratory lacked equipment for real-time adulteration detection, with upgrades delayed nearly three years despite clear evidence of need.
Oversight was compromised by overlapping membership in evaluation and inspection committees, eliminating independent scrutiny.
Complaints and grievances were ignored, and revised tender conditions were not enforced properly, allowing undue favours to certain firms. The report holds the Board, Purchase Committee, and senior officers, including the EO, Special Officer/Additional EO, FA&CAO, GM Procurements, and ghee/dairy experts, responsible for these lapses.
Vendor-specific lapses were documented in detail. Bhole Baba Dairy, disqualified in June 2022, continued supplying adulterated ghee confirmed by CFTRI, using synthetic masking agents such as Beta-Carotene and artificial ghee flavours to bypass basic tests.
Despite disqualification, it received additional orders and routed supplies through proxy dairies, including Vyshnavi, Malganga and AR Dairy. Premier Agri Foods Pvt Ltd, the largest supplier, from which the TTD procured 58.31 lakh kg across 11 tenders, continued to receive fresh orders even after confirmed adulteration, and was granted an exemption from FSSAI norms post-adverse CFTRI findings.
Sri Vyshnavi Dairy Specialities Pvt Ltd fabricated butter production figures, inflating actual output nearly 2,000 times, and despite CFTRI’s confirmation of adulteration, was allowed to supply after violating the no-negotiation rule.
AR Dairy Food Pvt Ltd fabricated FSSAI returns and ISO certifications, inflating milk handling and butter production figures, while NDDB CALF lab tests in July 2024 confirmed adulteration with milk fat purity and acid profiles out of specification.
Alpha Milk Foods Pvt Ltd manipulated capacity figures within months, exploited video-conference inspections during Covid-19, and sought exemption from FSSAI norms alongside Premier Agri Foods.
The committee recommended sweeping reforms to restore credibility and safeguard temple sanctity. It recommended an amendment to the Act to remove special invitees and induct professionals into a new Management Committee.
Procurement must be overhauled with a qualified head, a digital procurement manual, and a shift from L1 to QCBS (Quality-cum-Cost-Based Selection).
Vendor empanelment and direct procurement from cooperatives such as Mother Dairy and Amul via NCDFI were suggested.
An independent Quality Control wing led by a Food Safety Officer, strict third-party testing, and upgraded labs to FSSAI standards were recommended, along with a dedicated Food Safety Compliance Cell. A Complaint Monitoring System with ticket IDs, escalation protocols, and public disclosure of test reports was also proposed to ensure transparency and accountability.
The report concludes that systemic negligence, procedural lapses, and deliberate protection of vendor interests undermined governance and quality assurance at the TTD. It stresses that urgent structural reforms are essential to restore credibility, safeguard public health, and uphold the sanctity of temple offerings. ghee adulteration substitution vegetable oils artificial ghee flavours Police case registered Disqualification of vendors lab_confirmed Vijayawada, Krishna, Andhra Pradesh, India Srivari laddu prasadam fflo:hasAdulterant ghee adulterated ghee used in Srivari laddu prasadam adulteration with vegetable oils fflo:supportedBy CFTRI laboratory report CFTRI laboratory report dated August 3, 2022, confirmed adulteration with vegetable oils ghee fflo:hasAdulterant artificial ghee flavours using synthetic masking agents such as Beta-Carotene and artificial ghee flavours TTD ghee adulteration scandal prov:used ghee supply of adulterated ghee used in Srivari laddu prasadam ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable oils confirmed adulteration with vegetable oils vegetable oils fflo:detectedBy β-Sitosterol test presence of β-Sitosterol ghee fflo:hasAdulterant Beta-Carotene using synthetic masking agents such as Beta-Carotene AR Dairy Food Pvt Ltd fflo:hasAdulterant milk fat purity and acid profiles out of specification NDDB CALF lab tests in July 2024 confirmed adulteration with milk fat purity and acid profiles out of specification AR Dairy Food Pvt Ltd fflo:hasAdulterant milk fat purity and acid profiles out of specification NDDB CALF lab tests in July 2024 confirmed adulteration with milk fat purity and acid profiles out of specification26:T152e,TTD ghee row: AP govt panel submits its report, seeks action on officials | Hyderabad News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Vijayawada: The one-man committee appointed by the Andhra Pradesh govt to probe into the alleged supply of adulterated ghee to Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) has submitted its report to the govt. Pointing out serious administrative lapses by senior TTD officials in the procurement of cow ghee used for the preparation of laddu prasadam, the report has recommended disciplinary and administrative action against several officers for failure to enforce quality and food safety norms.
The committee, headed by retired IAS officer Dinesh Kumar was constituted following a Supreme Court-mandated special investigation team (SIT) probe into the alleged supply of adulterated ghee to TTD. The one-man committee report concluded that the ghee adulteration episode resulted from systemic governance and procurement failures rather than supplier-level lapses alone.
The report states that tender conditions strengthened in Aug 2019 to ensure supplier eligibility and quality assurance were diluted within five months without recorded justification or risk assessment. The TTD trust board has been held responsible for approving the dilution without scrutiny and for failing to act despite complaints related to the deteriorating quality of the sacred laddu prasadam.
The TTD purchase committee has been accused of recommending relaxed tender norms, accepting abnormally low bids without assessing viability, and approving post-bid price reductions through letters and emails, which the committee said amounted to prohibited negotiations.
A key finding relates to the handling of a CFTRI laboratory report dated Aug 3, 2022, which confirmed adulteration through detection of Î²-Sitosterol. The committee found that the report was not escalated through proper channels and no contractual action, including blacklisting, was taken despite tender provisions.
Responsibility has been fixed on former TTD executive officers, senior finance and procurement officials, and designated ghee and dairy experts for failing to enforce mandatory FSSAI norms, suppressing or delaying action on laboratory findings, and allowing continued supply by defaulting dairies. The committee pointed out that then TTD chairman Y Subba Reddy and executive officer AV Dharma Reddy ought to have followed up on the findings of CFTRI and acted accordingly but failed to do so, which allowed the suppliers to continue to send adulterated ghee.
The one-man committee has recommended a series of administrative reforms to address governance and procurement failures at TTD. These include professionalising the TTD board by inducting domain experts and clearly defining fiduciary responsibilities of board members on the lines of the Companies Act. The committee has also suggested repealing provisions that allow large-scale nomination of special invitees, citing strain on institutional resources and weak governance.
To strengthen execution, the report has called for setting up a management committee under the existing legal framework, with defined responsibility for implementation, monitoring and compliance with board decisions. It has recommended clearer demarcation of roles between the board, management and departmental wings.
On procurement, the committee has proposed overhauling the procurement wing, shifting from a lowest-price system to quality-cum-cost-based selection, introducing vendor empanelment and ensuring segregation of evaluation, inspection, and approval functions. It has stressed the need for an independent quality-control wing, mandatory laboratory testing for all consignments, and full compliance with food safety norms.
Other recommendations include strengthening vigilance oversight, improving public disclosure of test reports and suppliers, formalising expert engagement with clear accountability, and introducing a digital complaint-monitoring system with time-bound resolution and escalation mechanisms. ghee adulteration beta-sitosterol disciplinary and administrative action alleged Vijayawada, Krishna, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant adulterated ghee supply of adulterated ghee to Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams laddu prasadam fkg:hasIngredient cow ghee cow ghee used for the preparation of laddu prasadam Î²-Sitosterol fflo:detectedBy CFTRI laboratory report CFTRI laboratory report dated Aug 3, 2022, which confirmed adulteration through detection of Î²-Sitosterol TTD ghee adulteration episode prov:wasAssociatedWith TTD officials serious administrative lapses by senior TTD officials in the procurement of cow ghee TTD ghee adulteration episode prov:used cow ghee procurement of cow ghee used for the preparation of laddu prasadam TTD ghee adulteration episode prov:wasAssociatedWith TTD trust board TTD trust board has been held responsible for approving the dilution ghee fflo:hasAdulterant Î²-Sitosterol confirmed adulteration through detection of Î²-Sitosterol Ghee Adulteration Finding fflo:supportedBy CFTRI laboratory report CFTRI laboratory report dated Aug 3, 2022, which confirmed adulteration IncidentFinding: Ghee Adulteration at TTD fflo:foundIn ghee confirmed adulteration through detection of Î²-Sitosterol IncidentFinding: Ghee Adulteration at TTD fflo:identifies Î²-Sitosterol confirmed adulteration through detection of Î²-Sitosterol27:T125c,Pure ghee or not? TTD procures over 70 lakh kg without mandatory quality tests indiatimes.com The report submitted by the commission claimed that this "systemic failure" allowed suppliers to provide adulterated ghee, as officials allegedly ignored safety tests and suppressed lab reports that confirmed the presence of vegetable fats.
Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu appointed a one-man commission headed by retired IAS officer Dinesh Kumar to probe the supply of allegedly adulterated ghee to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams, after the Supreme Court-appointed SIT submitted its report.
Also Read: Ghee purity test: FSSAI shares 5-minute method to check adulteration at home
"TTD officials initially planned to incorporate mandatory FSSAI β-Sitosterol testing (effective July 1, 2022), but later reversed the decision and granted suppliers an exemption, leading to the procurement of over 70 lakh kg of ghee without the legally required quality checks," Kumar said in his report.
It highlighted that eligibility norms introduced in August 2019 were allegedly diluted within months without proper assessment, allowing non-compliant firms such as Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Milk Pvt Ltd to enter the supply chain despite lacking verifiable production capacity.
According to the report, a Central Food Technological Research Institute (CFTRI) lab test conducted on August 3, 2022, confirmed adulteration with vegetable oils through the presence of β-Sitosterol. However, the findings were allegedly suppressed, and firms were not blacklisted under tender conditions.
Mandatory FSSAI β-Sitosterol testing norms were initially planned but later scrapped, enabling procurement of over 70 lakh kg of ghee without such testing.
The commission noted that suppliers resorted to steep price cuts of up to Rs 207 per kg of ghee and alleged illegal post-auction negotiations.
It also said contracts were awarded to ineligible firms with over-reliance on L1 (lowest bid) pricing, which incentivised adulteration.
It further flagged that TTD's laboratory allegedly lacked equipment for real-time adulteration testing, and its upgrade-deemed necessary after the incident-was delayed by nearly three years.
The report pointed to overlapping membership in technical evaluation and plant inspection committees, which compromised independent oversight.
It also noted that complaints and quality monitoring systems were "largely ignored".
Also Read: Hyderabad fake ghee raid: How 3,000 kg of cow & buffalo cream were mixed with cheap substances and supplied to public
Investigation into specific vendors revealed that Bhole Baba Organic Dairy continued supplies even after disqualification and adverse lab reports, allegedly using synthetic additives such as beta-carotene, acetic acid ester, and artificial flavouring agents to bypass tests and routing supplies through intermediary dairies.
Premier Agri Foods Pvt Ltd, one of the largest suppliers, continued receiving fresh orders despite confirmed adulteration, while being granted exemptions from FSSAI testing norms, the commission report said.
AR Dairy Food Pvt Ltd submitted inflated production and certification records and failed independent laboratory tests, yet remained part of the supply chain, reflecting weak enforcement, Kumar said in his report.
The commission held the TTD board, purchase committee members, senior officials, and dairy experts responsible for governance failures, procedural lapses, and continued procurement from non-compliant vendors. ghee adulteration substandard prohibited_additive probe alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India Adulteration of ghee by AR Dairy Food Pvt Ltd prov:wasAssociatedWith AR Dairy Food Pvt Ltd AR Dairy Food Pvt Ltd submitted inflated production and certification records and failed independent laboratory tests ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable fats suppressed lab reports that confirmed the presence of vegetable fats ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith TTD officials officials allegedly ignored safety tests and suppressed lab reports ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable oils confirmed adulteration with vegetable oils CFTRI lab test fflo:identifies vegetable oils CFTRI lab test conducted on August 3, 2022, confirmed adulteration with vegetable oils ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable oils confirmed adulteration with vegetable oils ghee fflo:hasAdulterant beta-carotene using synthetic additives such as beta-carotene ghee fflo:hasAdulterant acetic acid ester using synthetic additives such as beta-carotene, acetic acid ester ghee fflo:hasAdulterant artificial flavouring agents using synthetic additives such as beta-carotene, acetic acid ester, and artificial flavouring agents28:T1d8e,‘70 lakh kg ghee used in Tirupati laddus without testing’: Probe panel points to organised adulteration network indianexpress.com ‘70 lakh kg ghee used in Tirupati laddus without testing’: Probe panel points to organised adulteration network
One-man committee formed by Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu alleges extensive administrative failures, procedural violations, and possible collusion that enabled the supply of adulterated ghee to Tirumala temple in the 2019-2024 period.
The one-man committee constituted by Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu to probe lapses in the procurement of ghee used in preparing the famous laddu offerings at the Tirumala Venkateswara Temple has alleged extensive administrative failures, procedural violations, and possible collusion that enabled the supply of adulterated ghee.
CM Naidu has alleged that during the previous YSRCP government’s term in the state between 2019 and 2024, adulterated ghee was used to make the laddu offerings (known as prasadam). The ghee is procured by the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD), which manages the Venkateswara temple.
The committee, comprising retired IAS officer Dinesh Kumar, was set up in February 2026 and tasked with identifying alleged tender norm relaxations, identifying those responsible for ghee adulteration and examining lapses in the procurement system.
In its report, the committee squarely fixes accountability on senior officials and the procurement machinery, holding them responsible for creating conditions that allowed contaminated ghee to enter the supply chain.
The report accused former executive officer A V Dharma Reddy of being the principal figure responsible for major lapses, including dilution of tender norms, failure to act on confirmed adulteration, and allowing continued engagement of questionable suppliers. He has previously said that all decisions were taken with the consent of all members of the procurement committee and that contracts were given as per the rules.
The procurement committee’s role has come under severe scrutiny, with former YSRCP MLAs Chevireddy Bhaskar Reddy and Bhumana Karunakar Reddy, who is also the former TTD chairman, being accused, along with other members of the committee, of having participated in key decisions that diluted tender norms and weakened safeguards.
The YSRCP has maintained that the allegations are politically motivated. YSRCP general secretary G Srikanth Reddy said the allegations were part of a campaign against political adversaries of CM Naidu.
“This has been done to cover up his failures and sling mud at the Opposition,” he said, adding that blatant lies about the Tirupati laddu were being spread. He was referring to allegations raised earlier that the ghee used to make the laddu prasadam had been adulterated with animal fat. A probe team’s analysis of samples detected adulteration, but not by the use of any animal fat.
The one-man committee report has further alleged that adulterated ghee was allowed into the system despite clear evidence of adulteration. As per the committee, a CFTRI laboratory report dated August 3, 2022, detected β-Sitosterol, a marker of vegetable oil adulteration, in all tested samples. Despite this, the report was not acted upon, suppliers were not blacklisted, and procurement continued unchecked, the committee alleged.
Procurement failures
The probe report claimed that the procurement framework itself incentivised adulteration. Excessive reliance on the lowest price (L1) led to acceptance of abnormally low bids, including drastic price drops that made the supply of pure ghee unviable, it said, adding that in multiple cases, post-auction price reductions were allowed through informal communication, directly violating tender norms. Mandatory food safety regulations were allegedly ignored. Even after β-Sitosterol testing became compulsory from July 1, 2022, the TTD, during the YSRCP term, failed to enforce it in its procurement process, the report alleged.
As a result, over 70 lakh kg of ghee was procured without mandatory testing, and large quantities were accepted without proper verification, the report said. The ghee consignments were accepted and used for preparing the laddu prasadam even before laboratory test results were received, the report claimed.
The report also said there was an organised adulteration network, where a key supplier manufactured adulterated ghee using vegetable oils and additives and continued supply through intermediary dairies even after disqualification, pointing to a coordinated attempt to bypass safeguards.
The committee has recommended strict disciplinary action against all officials responsible, including those who approved the alleged dilution of tender norms and purportedly failed to act on confirmed adulteration.
It has called for the immediate blacklisting of all erring suppliers involved in the adulteration supply chain, along with the initiation of legal and penal action. A complete overhaul of the procurement system has been recommended, including the elimination of over-reliance on L1 bidding and the introduction of stronger quality-based evaluation mechanisms.
The committee has stressed the urgent need to establish a robust, real-time in-house testing infrastructure to detect adulteration before the acceptance of consignments. It has also recommended strict enforcement of food safety standards, removal of conflicts of interest in committee structures, and introduction of independent oversight mechanisms to ensure transparency and accountability. The report states that this was not merely a lapse but a systemic breakdown that enabled adulterated ghee to enter the system and be used in one of the most sacred institutions, severely impacting public trust and religious sentiments on a massive scale. ghee adulteration vegetable oils additives blacklisting of all erring suppliers legal and penal action alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India laddu fkg:hasIngredient ghee ghee used in preparing the famous laddu offerings ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable oils manufactured adulterated ghee using vegetable oils ghee fflo:hasAdulterant additives manufactured adulterated ghee using vegetable oils and additives manufactured adulterated ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith key supplier key supplier manufactured adulterated ghee using vegetable oils ghee fflo:foundAtStep Tirumala Venkateswara Temple supply of adulterated ghee to Tirumala temple Tirupati ghee adulteration incident prov:wasAttributedTo A V Dharma Reddy accused former executive officer A V Dharma Reddy of being the principal figure responsible adulteration detection in ghee samples fflo:foundIn ghee A probe team's analysis of samples detected adulteration ghee fflo:hasAdulterant β-Sitosterol detected β-Sitosterol, a marker of vegetable oil adulteration, in all tested samples analysis of ghee samples fso:isPerformedAt CFTRI CFTRI laboratory report dated August 3, 2022, detected β-Sitosterol detection of β-Sitosterol in ghee fflo:foundAtStep procurement CFTRI laboratory report dated August 3, 2022, detected β-Sitosterol ghee fflo:inputTo laddu prasadam preparation used for preparing the laddu prasadam ghee fflo:foundAtStep acceptance before test results accepted and used... even before laboratory test results were received blacklisting of all erring suppliers fflo:issuedBy committee called for the immediate blacklisting of all erring suppliers legal and penal action fflo:issuedBy committee initiation of legal and penal action29:Tbba,Food safety administration flags substandard food products nagalandpost.com Food Safety Administration, Dimapur Zone (Dimapur, Niuland, Chumoukedima, Mon and Peren) has issued a public notice identifying several food products as substandard following routine surveillance and laboratory testing conducted under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006.
In a press release, designated officer, Pelerieno Kehie, stated that under the Act, a food item is classified as “substandard” when it fails to meet prescribed quality standards, but not so as to render the article of food unsafe.
The administration urged consumers to distinguish between substandard (low-quality) and unsafe (harmful or toxic) food.
While substandard items may not cause immediate illness, designated officer said they still violate regulatory norms and undermine consumer trust.
According to the notice, four products failed to meet mandatory quality benchmarks:
1) Mast Health Multi-source Edible Oil (370g), batch BMMS-69; manufactured November 9, 2025; expiry July 8, 2026
2) Top Paneer Sterilised by JK Dairy (450g), batch 300PA25; manufactured October 27, 2025; expiry July 26, 2026
3) William’s Vinegar (350 ml), batch 105; packaged November 2025; best before 24 months
4) Shreeji Refined Soyabean Oil (375g), batch OPG30; manufactured September 30, 2025; expiry June 29, 2026
The Food Safety Administration informed that legal proceedings have been initiated against the sellers involved.
Under the Act, any person found manufacturing, storing, selling or importing substandard food is liable for a penalty of up to Rs 5 lakh.
It further noted that “unsafe” food—posing a direct risk to public health—attracts much stricter penalties, including heavy fines and imprisonment.
Consumers have been advised to check their pantries for the listed batch numbers. Retailers have been directed to immediately remove the specified lots from their shelves.
For further information or to report concerns, consumers may contact the Food Safety Helpline at 03862-366349 during office hours or reach the chief medical officer’s office (food safety section). Mast Health Multi-source Edible Oil substandard public notice legal proceedings suspected Dimapur, Nagaland, India Mast Health Multi-source Edible Oil fflo:belongsToCategory Edible Oils Mast Health Multi-source Edible Oil Top Paneer fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy Top Paneer Sterilised by JK Dairy public notice identifying several food products as substandard fflo:issuedBy Food Safety Administration, Dimapur Zone issued a public notice identifying several food products as substandard legal proceedings against sellers fflo:issuedBy Food Safety Administration legal proceedings have been initiated against the sellers involved unsafe food fflo:triggersPenalty heavy fines and imprisonment attracts much stricter penalties, including heavy fines and imprisonment Food Safety Helpline fflo:contactNumber 03862-366349 contact the Food Safety Helpline at 03862-3663492a:T2217,Ghee Purity Check Tips: FSDA declares 6 desi ghee brands unsafe: How to check ghee purity and the easiest way to make ghee at home - The Times of India indiatimes.com Ghee, also known as clarified butter, is an Ayurveda-approved food item highly valued for its medicinal properties. It is believed to promote digestion, boost immunity, and nourish the skin and hair. But, what if the ghee you are using is made with vegetable fat, fatty acid mono- and diglycerides and can lead to major health issues? According to the latest reports, the Food Safety and Drug Administration (FSDA) has declared six brands of ghee in Aligarh unsafe. The manufacture, sale, and storage of these brands have now been banned in the district. This action was taken based on test reports received from various districts.
According to an online report by Jagran, the ghee samples of all six brands failed the quality test and have therefore been classified as unsafe. The banned brands include Vrajvasi, Verona Products Pvt Ltd (Rajkot, Gujarat), Ratnagiri Chalisa Foods (Surat, Gujarat), Haryana Fresh (Gheeradhar Milk Foods Pvt Ltd, Panipat, Haryana), Dairy Nice (DCM Food & Milk Products, Narela, Delhi), Shri Rudra Devansh Products (Hisar, Haryana) and Avik Shiva Milk Foods (Ghaziabad, Uttar)
The official YouTube channel of Zee News has also mentioned that the officials recently seized 252 kg of adulterated ghee in a van. 
The adulterated ghee was packed in 6 blue trunks was being transported to other parts of the district. According to officials, the sale of ghee from these brands in any shop, stall, warehouse, or distribution channel in the district will lead to strict legal action. Consumers have also been urged to pay special attention to the brand and quality when purchasing ghee. Adulterated ghee is not just unsafe for body but human brain too. It is said to be affect the functioning of the nervous system. 
Why ghee purity check is important
Adulterated ghee often contains harmful or inferior substances like vanaspati (hydrogenated fats), starch, animal fats, or synthetic colors and can pose serious health risks. The use of adulterants like starch or soapstone can also disturb the digestive system, leading to bloating, stomach pain, or diarrhea. It has also been found that some brands mix ghee with vanaspati or hydrogenated oils. These mixtures are high in trans fats, which leads to a rise in bad cholesterol (LDL), lower good cholesterol (HDL), and significantly increases the risk of heart disease. The common adulterants used in ghee are refined vegetable oil, animal body fat, starch or mashed potatoes, and even synthetic flavouring agents. Adulterated ghee not only reduces nutritional value but may also pose health risks due to trans fats and low-quality ingredients. Adulterated ghee not just impacts the gut health, it is also said to disturb the overall functioning of the body and in severe cases it can damage the nervous system too. According to experts, the adulteration often starts with impacting the gut first and slowly impacts the other body parts and the linings of intestines as well. Hence, extra care of what you eat and how you eat is very crucial. 
Appearance and texture: Traditionally, ghee in its purest form has a golden color and a rich, creamy texture. When held against light it should appear translucent and clear. The pale color of ghee could indicate preservatives, and one should avoid it.
Packaging and label: It is important to pay special attention to the packaging and label of ghee products. A genuine ghee brand will have all major certificates of regulatory compliance on it. The license number, date of packaging, and expiry date should be thoroughly checked before buying ghee.
Aroma and flavor: Naturally, ghee has a nutty flavor and a smooth consistency. The ghee should never smell burnt as it has a high heating point. A burnt smell could be due to the presence of water or additives. Hence, such ghee should be avoided at all costs.
Palm test: Simply, pour frozen ghee on your palm and if it starts melting instantly then the ghee is pure. Otherwise, it is not pure, and such ghee should be avoided.
Water test: Fill a glass with normal room-temperature water, add ghee to it. If the ghee floats it is unadulterated and if it sinks, the ghee is infused with foreign material.
Salt test: Add a pinch of Hyaluronic acid and tablespoon of salt to two spoons of ghee. After 20 minutes check the color of the ghee. If the ghee has turned red it means it is adulterated.
Iodine test: Add two drops of iodine solution to ghee. If it turns purple, the ghee has starch present in it.
Poll
What matters most when buying ghee?
How to make pure ghee at home
Ingredients: 1 kg homemade malai , 2 cups ice water, and 1/2 tbsp curd
Method: Store homemade malai for 30-35 days or until it measures 1 kg and then warm it up. Once it is lukewarm, stir in curd, cover and let it set for 8-10 hours. Refrigerate it for 12 hours and then, with the help of a hand churner, churn the milk solids until they turn into light and fluffy butter. Add 2 cups of ice water, then separate the butter and buttermilk. Transfer the butter to a heavy-bottomed pan and simmer on low flame until the clear, golden liquid is visible. Your homemade ghee is ready. Let it cool down, strain and store it in an air-tight glass jar or steel container. Use the buttermilk as a drink or use it to make cheela or kadhi.
Images Courtesy: istock ghee adulteration seizure ban pending_test India, Aligarh ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable fat ghee you are using is made with vegetable fat ghee fflo:hasAdulterant fatty acid mono- and diglycerides ghee you are using is made with vegetable fat, fatty acid mono- and diglycerides ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vanaspati Adulterated ghee often contains harmful or inferior substances like vanaspati ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fats Adulterated ghee often contains harmful or inferior substances like vanaspati (hydrogenated fats), starch, animal fats ghee fflo:hasAdulterant refined vegetable oil The common adulterants used in ghee are refined vegetable oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal body fat The common adulterants used in ghee are refined vegetable oil, animal body fat ghee fflo:hasAdulterant mashed potatoes The common adulterants used in ghee are refined vegetable oil, animal body fat, starch or mashed potatoes trans fats fflo:causesEffect heart disease These mixtures are high in trans fats, which leads to a rise in bad cholesterol (LDL), lower good cholesterol (HDL), and significantly increases the risk of heart disease ghee fflo:hasAdulterant starch If it turns purple, the ghee has starch present in it. ban on manufacture, sale, and storage of six ghee brands fflo:issuedBy FSDA The manufacture, sale, and storage of these brands have now been banned ghee quality test failure prov:wasAttributedTo Vrajvasi The banned brands include Vrajvasi unsafe ghee finding prov:wasAttributedTo DCM Food & Milk Products Dairy Nice (DCM Food & Milk Products, Narela, Delhi) Seizure of 252 kg adulterated ghee fflo:foundAtStep Distribution officials recently seized 252 kg of adulterated ghee in a van adulterated ghee fflo:causesEffect nervous system dysfunction affect the functioning of the nervous system ghee fflo:hasAdulterant soapstone The use of adulterants like starch or soapstone ghee fflo:hasAdulterant synthetic flavouring agents The common adulterants used in ghee are ... synthetic flavouring agents ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod sinking in water indicating foreign material if it sinks, the ghee is infused with foreign material SensoryTest fflo:producesIndicator pale color The pale color of ghee could indicate preservatives SensoryTest fflo:producesIndicator burnt smell The ghee should never smell burnt as it has a high heating point. Palm test fflo:producesIndicator instant melting pour frozen ghee on your palm and if it starts melting instantly Water test fflo:producesIndicator sinking in water if it sinks, the ghee is infused with foreign material starch fflo:detectedBy Iodine test If it turns purple, the ghee has starch present in it. Iodine test fflo:producesIndicator purple color If it turns purple, the ghee has starch present in it. Salt test fflo:producesIndicator red color If the ghee has turned red it means it is adulterated. homemade ghee fkg:hasIngredient homemade malai Ingredients: 1 kg homemade malai homemade ghee fkg:hasIngredient curd 1/2 tbsp curd butter fflo:outputOf churning milk solids churn the milk solids until they turn into light and fluffy butter homemade ghee fflo:outputOf simmering butter Transfer the butter to a heavy-bottomed pan and simmer on low flame until the clear, golden liquid is visible.2b:T14ec,Anwar Qureshi manufactured and sold fake ghee made using animal fat, skin and bones in Khandwa; arrested opindia.com On 24th April, Khandwa Police in Madhya Pradesh arrested a man identified as Anwar Qureshi for manufacturing and selling fake ghee. Qureshi was making the ghee like substance using animal fat, bones and skin. The manufacturing unit was operating from a narrow lane near Begum Park in the Imalipura area. The authorities raided the place after receiving repeated complaints that animals were being cut at the premises and their fat, bones and skin were being processed for use in food like products.
The district administration, municipal corporation, veterinary department and police formed a joint team and raided the place. The authorities suspect that Qureshi was selling fake ghee in the local market, including food joints and restaurants.
During the raid, officials recovered sacks filled with animal skin and bones. They also found drums and containers filled with fat based material. Authorities recovered a large quantity of raw material, finished liquid, and a ghee like substance from the spot.
9 drums and 79 containers seized
Speaking to the media, City Magistrate Bajrang Bahadur said that the team recovered 79 containers from the premises and each container had around 30 kg of suspicious material. Furthermore, the authorities also recovered nine large drums of 200 kg capacity, which were filled with animal fat.
The veterinary department collected samples, which were sent for laboratory examination. Officials stated that the material found in the drums appeared to be animal fat at first sight. However, the exact nature and intended use of the seized material would be confirmed after the lab report.
What the FIR says
OpIndia accessed the FIR in the matter. It has been registered on the complaint of the zone in charge of the Municipal Corporation of Khandwa at Moghat Road police station, Khandwa, Madhya Pradesh, under Section 7 of the Madhya Pradesh Agricultural Cattle Preservation Act and Section 292 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita (BNS) against Anwar Sheikh Bismillah Qureshi.
SHO Dharwal stated that he received a letter from the Municipal Corporation, Khandwa, signed by Zakir Ahmed and Bhuvan Shrimali, in charge zone officers, to register an FIR in the matter.
According to the complaint, a joint inspection was carried out in the area opposite Begum Park, Pardeshipura, Khandwa, by the City Magistrate, City CP, Tehsildar, Deputy Commissioner of the Municipal Corporation, SHO of Moghat Road PS and other subordinate staff. The premises belonged to Sheikh Anwar Sheikh Bismillah Qureshi, where he was melting animal fat inside his own house.
The so called licence of the Municipal Corporation Khandwa produced on the spot by Anwar was found to belong to another person and its validity had expired in 2023. Despite this, Anwar was found to be storing and trading animal remains, including fat, skin, horns, and other material, in an unauthorised and illegal manner.
During the raid, the authorities recovered 69 tins of fat with a capacity of 15 kg each, nine drums of 200 litres capacity containing an unknown chemical, 600 pieces of leather, 35 sacks of horns of buffalo or similar animals, and six sacks of pipes or tubular parts of buffalo and similar animals.
Locals question how the unit was running without action for so long
In a statement, Khandwa CSP Abhiram Warange said that Qureshi, the owner of the premises, was detained for questioning. Police were trying to find out since when he was running the business and who else was involved in the network.
According to media reports, locals had complained several times about suspicious activities at the premises. However, no action was taken till the recent raid. According to complaints, animals were being brought to the location, cut there, and their fat, bones and skin were being cooked and processed. Following the raid, the residents questioned how such activities were allowed to run for such a long time without being stopped.
MLA Kanchan Tanve reacted to the incident
Following the raid, Khandwa MLA Kanchan Tanve reached the spot and described the incident as extremely serious. She demanded strict action from the district administration and called for tough steps against those found guilty. ghee adulteration manufacturing selling suspected Khandwa, Madhya Pradesh, India, Khandwa, Madhya Pradesh manufacturing fake ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith Anwar Qureshi Anwar Qureshi for manufacturing and selling fake ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat fake ghee made using animal fat ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal skin fake ghee made using animal fat, skin and bones ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal bones fake ghee made using animal fat, skin and bones laboratory examination fso:isPerformedOn samples collected samples, which were sent for laboratory examination manufacturing fake ghee prov:used animal skin using animal fat, bones and skin manufacturing fake ghee prov:used animal bones using animal fat, bones and skin Moghat Road police station fflo:inRegion Khandwa Moghat Road police station, Khandwa melting animal fat prov:wasAssociatedWith Anwar Qureshi he was melting animal fat inside his own house buffalo horns fflo:foundAt Sheikh Anwar Sheikh Bismillah Qureshi's premises 35 sacks of horns of buffalo or similar animals2c:Td5d,Raid Uncovers 3k Litres Ghee Made Using Animal Fat In Madhya Pradesh's Khandwa, 2 Held freepressjournal.in Khandwa (Madhya Pradesh): A raid on an illegal ghee factory in Khandwa district led to the recovery of around 3,350 litres of adulterated ghee, prepared using animal fat.
The operation was carried out by City Magistrate Bajrang Bahadur, along with Municipal Deputy Commissioner Sachin Sitole and CSP Abhinav Barange, said officials on Friday.
The factory was located near Begum Park in Imlipura and had been running since 2015. During the raid, officials found 69 tin containers and nine blue drums filled with fat-mixed ghee.
Large amounts of animal fat and cattle hides were also found stacked inside the premises. Four trucks belonging to the Municipal Corporation were used to transport the seized material to a secure location. Cattle remains were also found in three other trucks at the site.
Two men, Anwar Qureshi and his associate Shakeel Qureshi, were detained on the spot. Police are currently questioning both of them. Their call records are also being reviewed to identify the full network involved in the operation.
The raid came after repeated complaints from residents, who had been raising the issue for a long time. They claimed that hundreds of cattle were brought to the factory daily and slaughtered there. Despite sending written complaints to the police and administration several times, no action was taken until now.
Residents also said that the foul smell from the factory has been causing illness among children and the elderly in the area. Health problems, including cholera-like symptoms, have been reported. Locals alleged that a Health Department team had visited earlier but did nothing.
Khandwa City Magistrate Bajrang Bahadur Singh said a resident complained about illegal animal slaughter and fat extraction inside a house, causing foul odor. A Municipal Corporation team raided the site, uncovering an illegal unit. Investigation is underway.
Khandwa MLA Kanchan Tanve, along with BJP leaders, visited the site and alleged brutal cattle slaughter. She said the matter would be raised with the Chief Minister.
Samples of the ghee and animal remains have been sent to a laboratory. Magistrate Bajrang Bahadur said the exact source of the fat will be known only after the lab report. Action under the National Security Act is also being considered against the suspects. ghee adulteration animal fat raid detention seizure alleged Khandwa, Madhya Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat adulterated ghee, prepared using animal fat ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat adulterated ghee, prepared using animal fat illness among children and the elderly fflo:affectsPopulation children causing illness among children and the elderly illness among children and the elderly fflo:affectsPopulation elderly causing illness among children and the elderly illegal ghee factory operation prov:wasAssociatedWith Anwar Qureshi Two men, Anwar Qureshi and his associate Shakeel Qureshi, were detained illegal ghee factory operation prov:wasAssociatedWith Shakeel Qureshi Two men, Anwar Qureshi and his associate Shakeel Qureshi, were detained animal fat fflo:foundAt Processing Large amounts of animal fat and cattle hides were also found stacked inside the premises cholera-like symptoms fflo:hasEffectType AcuteEffect Health problems, including cholera-like symptoms, have been reported2d:T1244,AMC health dept busts fake ghee unit in Nikol bungalow indiatimes.com Ahmedabad: On Thursday, the health department of Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation (AMC) carried out a raid at a bungalow situated in the Nikol area of the city, where a unit manufacturing fake ghee was unearthed. In a room on the first floor of the bungalow, ghee was being manufactured using a blend of vegetable fat and palm oil. The product was packed and sold in the name of cow ghee. The address mentioned on the cow ghee packets belonged to another manufacturing unit whose licence had lapsed, while the fake ghee was being produced and sold from this site without any licence.
Following the raid, packets of fake ghee were seized and legal proceedings have been initiated. Deputy health officer Dr Tejas Shah said, "The room on the first floor of the residential premises has been sealed." 
An official from the department said, "The health department received inputs that fake ghee was being manufactured without any authorization on the first floor of a residential bungalow located in Royal Bungalows society. Acting on this information, a team carried out an inspection of the said business unit. 
During the inspection, major discrepancies were detected on the premises." 
He further said, "Ghee manufacturing was being carried out without obtaining FSSAI registration or licence. A mixture of vegetable fat and palm oil was being used for making fake and adulterated cow ghee. It was packed under the brand name âMangalmurti'. Moreover, while the ghee was produced and packed at this residential location, it was shown as manufactured and packed in Ved Industry Park 2, Kathwada, Nikol. The address of the manufacturing unit mentioned on the packaging differed from the actual production location, and the licence of the unit shown had also expired." 
He added, "500g jars and 100ml jars found on the premises have been seized, with an estimated market value of around Rs 1.6 lakh. In addition, empty 500g and 100ml jars meant for packing the fake ghee, along with a stock of labels to be pasted on the jars, were confiscated. Packing machinery, gas cylinders, utensils, and tubs were also seized. Samples of Cow Ghee (Mangalmurti) in 500g and 100ml pack jars have been collected and forwarded to the food laboratory for analysis under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006." ghee adulteration seized legal_proceedings pending_test India, Nikol area of Ahmedabad ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable fat ghee was being manufactured using a blend of vegetable fat and palm oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil ghee was being manufactured using a blend of vegetable fat and palm oil vegetable fat fflo:isSubstituteFor cow ghee ghee was being manufactured using a blend of vegetable fat and palm oil. The product was packed and sold in the name of cow ghee. palm oil fflo:isSubstituteFor cow ghee ghee was being manufactured using a blend of vegetable fat and palm oil. The product was packed and sold in the name of cow ghee. cow ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable fat A mixture of vegetable fat and palm oil was being used for making fake and adulterated cow ghee. cow ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil A mixture of vegetable fat and palm oil was being used for making fake and adulterated cow ghee. fake cow ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod substitution of vegetable fat and palm oil A mixture of vegetable fat and palm oil was being used for making fake and adulterated cow ghee. analysis under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 fso:isPerformedOn Samples of Cow Ghee (Mangalmurti) Samples of Cow Ghee (Mangalmurti) in 500g and 100ml pack jars have been collected and forwarded to the food laboratory for analysis under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 blending vegetable fat and palm oil fflo:hasFraudType Substitution ghee was being manufactured using a blend of vegetable fat and palm oil selling fake ghee as cow ghee fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling The product was packed and sold in the name of cow ghee. blending vegetable fat and palm oil fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional ghee was being manufactured using a blend of vegetable fat and palm oil substitution of vegetable fat and palm oil fflo:hasFraudType Substitution A mixture of vegetable fat and palm oil was being used for making fake and adulterated cow ghee. cow ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod mislabeling of manufacturing location The address of the manufacturing unit mentioned on the packaging differed from the actual production location mislabeling of manufacturing location fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling The address of the manufacturing unit mentioned on the packaging differed from the actual production location2e:Te58,Cyberabad food adulteration raids Hyderabad Rs 64 lakh seizure 28 arrested indiatoday.in Food adulteration racket busted in Hyderabad; oil, namkeen worth lakhs seized
Sources revealed that the police had major success in seizing 5,026 litres of oil and 5,192 kilograms of wheat during the operation, which targeted a wide range of items, including bakery products, sweets, salty snacks, edible oils, wheat flour, ginger-garlic paste, meat products, ice creams, and sauces.
In a major crackdown on food adulteration and illegal manufacturing, the Cyberabad Enforcement Wing carried out extensive search operations from January 1 to April 21 in Hyderabad, seizing adulterated food items, machinery, and vehicles worth Rs 64.07 lakh, and arresting 28 individuals associated with the units, sources close to the development told India Today.
Sources further revealed that the police had a major success in seizing 5,026 litres of oil and 5,192 kilograms of wheat during the operation, which targeted a wide range of items, including bakery products, sweets, salty snacks, edible oils, wheat flour, ginger-garlic paste, meat products, ice creams, and sauces.
Several units that came under the scanner allegedly used expired ingredients, synthetic food colours, and hazardous chemicals. Many establishments were found operating in highly unhygienic conditions without valid FSSAI certification or trade licences.
Overall, the police registered 22 cases and busted manufacturing units that were preparing ginger-garlic paste using harmful preservatives and fake branding.
Following the raids, the police urged citizens to purchase food products only from licensed vendors, to check expiry dates, and to report any suspicious activity to authorities.
In a separate incident, police also arrested 10 people associated with a tea-powder adulteration racket and seized a large quantity of products.
"Authorities found 10 tea godowns containing adulterated stock. Around 3000 kg of adulterated tea powder, 1500 kg of expired tea powder, and synthetic colour and jaggery items were seized. Hyderabad, known for its tea culture, is facing a racket where adulterated tea is supplied to roadside vendors, stalls, and centres across the city. The culprits mixed synthetic dyes into cheap or expired tea powder sourced from West Bengal and Assam, then sold it at lower prices," senior police officer Gaikwad Vaibhav Ragunath told news agency ANI. edible oil adulteration seizure suspected Hyderabad, Telangana, India Hyderabad food adulteration crackdown fflo:inRegion Hyderabad Food adulteration racket busted in Hyderabad ginger-garlic paste fflo:hasAdulterant harmful preservatives preparing ginger-garlic paste using harmful preservatives tea powder fflo:hasAdulterant synthetic dyes mixed synthetic dyes into cheap or expired tea powder expired tea powder fflo:hasAdulterant synthetic dyes mixed synthetic dyes into cheap or expired tea powder Hyderabad food adulteration crackdown fflo:issuedBy Cyberabad Enforcement Wing Cyberabad Enforcement Wing carried out extensive search operations bakery products fflo:hasAdulterant expired ingredients units that came under the scanner allegedly used expired ingredients salty snacks fflo:hasAdulterant expired ingredients units that came under the scanner allegedly used expired ingredients adulterated tea powder fflo:foundAtStep Retail adulterated tea is supplied to roadside vendors, stalls, and centres Tea powder adulteration racket fflo:inRegion Hyderabad Hyderabad, known for its tea culture, is facing a racket tea powder fflo:hasAdulterationMethod mixing synthetic dyes culprits mixed synthetic dyes into cheap or expired tea powder2f:T718,Cyberabad Cops Book 28, Seize Adulterated Food Worth Rs 64 Lakh deccanchronicle.com Cyberabad Police said strict action will continue against offenders to ensure food safety and protect public health.
Hyderabad: Cyberabad Enforcement Wing along with the Special Operations Team (SOT) booked 28 persons for running food adulteration and illegal manufacturing units, seizing adulterated food material, raw stock and property worth Rs 64.07 lakh.
The seizures included bakery products, sweets, 120 kg of namkeen, 230 kg of meat, 3,809 kg of ginger‑garlic paste, 150 kg of loose sauces, ice cream stock and three tonnes of used cooking oil. Police said 22 offences were detected since January 1 during raids across the commissionerate.
Investigators found several units preparing and selling adulterated food items that posed risks to public health. Raids targeted bakeries, sweet shops, namkeen units, edible oils, wheat flour, ginger‑garlic paste, meat products, ice creams and sauces. Many were operating without valid FSSAI or trade licences, using expired ingredients, synthetic colours and unsafe chemicals in unhygienic conditions.
In one case, police seized 5,026 litres of adulterated edible oil and 5,192 kg of wheat flour. Illegal units manufacturing ginger‑garlic paste with harmful preservatives and fake branding were also unearthed.
Police urged citizens to purchase food only from licensed vendors, check expiry dates and report suspicious activity to the police and food safety department.
Cyberabad Police said strict action will continue against offenders to ensure food safety and protect public health. edible oil adulteration booking of persons seizure of goods suspected Cyberabad, Telangana, India Adulteration Act in Cyberabad prov:used sweets The seizures included bakery products, sweets30:Ta85,22 cases booked in Cyberabad food adulteration crackdown, ₹64 lakh worth goods seized thehindu.com A total of 28 individuals were arrested, and 22 cases were booked by the Cyberabad Enforcement Wing during a series of raids conducted between January 1 and April 21, 2026, targeting food adulteration and illegal food manufacturing across the commissionerate. Adulterated food items, along with machinery and vehicles, valued at approximately ₹64.07 lakh were seized during the raids.
The operation focused on a wide range of food categories, including bakery and cake products, sweets and namkeen, edible oils, wheat flour, ginger-garlic paste, meat products, ice creams, sauces and the illegal reuse of cooking oil. Investigations revealed widespread violations, with several units using expired ingredients, synthetic food colours and unsafe chemicals, while operating in unhygienic conditions without valid Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) or trade licences.
A major case involved large-scale adulteration of edible oil and wheat flour, leading to the seizure of 5,026 litres of oil and 5,192 kilograms of flour. Authorities also uncovered illegal units manufacturing ginger-garlic paste using harmful preservatives and counterfeit branding.
According to item-wise data, nine cases were registered in the bakery and cake products category with seizures worth ₹2,72,980. Three cases related to sweets and namkeen led to the seizure of 120 kilograms of products valued at ₹62,000. One case each was booked in edible oil and wheat flour, with seizures worth ₹10,55,460 and ₹3,11,520 respectively.
Two cases involving ginger-garlic paste resulted in the seizure of 3,809 kilograms valued at ₹9,57,280, while two cases in meat and chicken products saw 230 kilograms seized worth ₹63,290. In the ice-cream category, two cases were registered with stock worth ₹8,00,000 seized. One case involving sauces and processed food led to the seizure of 150 kilograms of loose sauce valued at ₹39,900. Officials also seized three tonnes of used cooking oil seized worth ₹11 lakh.
Meanwhile, the police urged people to purchase food items only from licensed vendors, check expiry dates and report suspicious activities to authorities. Officials said strict enforcement will continue to curb food adulteration and safeguard public health.
Published - April 22, 2026 07:32 pm IST edible oil adulteration case_booked seizure alleged Cyberabad, Telangana, India ginger-garlic paste fflo:hasAdulterant harmful preservatives manufacturing ginger-garlic paste using harmful preservatives edible oil fflo:belongsToCategory Edible Oils One case each was booked in edible oil31:Td93,Unlicensed dairy unit raided, ghee & milk worth Rs 7 lakh seized indiatimes.com Hyderabad: Conducting a flying squad inspection at Meghana Foods in Nacharam as part of a special drive, the food safety department seized ghee and packaged milk worth Rs 7.7 lakh, suspecting adulteration, on Monday. The seized items include 632 packs of cow ghee (394 kg) worth Rs 2.7 lakh and 7,208 milk tetra packs valued at Rs 5 lakh.
According to the commissioner of food safety office, Sangeeta Satyanarayana the unit was found allegedly selling milk and ghee products under the âVijaya' brand. However, officials found that the distribution facility was operating without a valid FSSAI licence, raising concerns about the authenticity and safety of the products.
"During the inspection, we found that the cow ghee (Vijaya brand) was manufactured by a dairy in Gujarat, while Vijaya Suprabhatam UHT Toned Milk tetra packs were produced by a dairy in Indore. Both products were being marketed by Meghana Food, located in Rikabgunj, Charminar, with claims of being a franchise of the AP Dairy Development Co-Operative Federation. We suspect adulteration as the distribution point at IDA Nacharam was found to be unauthorized and operating without a valid FSSAI license," she added.
Officials sent samples of the products for laboratory analysis, while the remaining stock has been sealed. "A notice has been issued to the operator, and further action will be taken based on test results," said the commissioner. The inspections were a part of a broader statewide special enforcement drive, during which 71 inspections were conducted, and 91 samples were collected to assess quality standards.
Officials said that the drive revealed several violations, including the sale of loose cow and buffalo milk and non-branded ghee across multiple districts. Milk centres were found operating without valid registration certificates, prompting authorities to issue notices. In certain instances, loose ghee deemed unsafe during preliminary checks was discarded.
"All collected samples have been sent for testing, and further action will be initiated under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006,. This will be done through improvement and show-cause notices to non-compliant establishments," said Satyanarayana. ghee unsafe_food adulteration discarding_unsafe_loose_ghee suspected Telangana, India Unsafe loose ghee finding fflo:producedBy Preliminary checks loose ghee deemed unsafe during preliminary checks Preliminary check finding of unsafe loose ghee fflo:triggeredAction Discarding unsafe loose ghee loose ghee deemed unsafe during preliminary checks was discarded Laboratory analysis fso:isPerformedOn samples Officials sent samples of the products for laboratory analysis Mislabeling at Meghana Foods fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling claims of being a franchise of the AP Dairy Development Co-Operative Federation sale of non-branded ghee fflo:foundAtStep Retail sale of loose cow and buffalo milk and non-branded ghee sale of loose cow and buffalo milk fflo:foundAtStep Retail sale of loose cow and buffalo milk Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 fflo:appliesToFood ghee action will be initiated under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 fflo:appliesToFood milk action will be initiated under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 non-compliant establishments fflo:triggeredAction Show-cause notice show-cause notices to non-compliant establishments32:Tebf,Unit making spurious ghee flourishing for 2 years busted in Sachin GIDC | Surat News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Surat: The Special Operations Group (SOG) police have busted a duplicate ghee manufacturing unit in Sachin GIDC and seized 2,029 kg of adulterated ghee worth around Rs 15 lakh.
Police said the unit had been operating for the past two years and was producing ghee of varying quality depending on client demand. The accused were supplying the product under the âVidur' brand across South Gujarat at around Rs 600 per kg, while it was sold in retail markets for nearly Rs 1,000 per kg.
According to investigators, the accused produced nearly 1,000 kg of ghee every day and packaged it professionally before distributing it in the market. Police also recovered Rs 2 lakh in cash, suspected to be proceeds from the sale of the adulterated ghee.
Deputy commissioner of police (SOG) Rajdeep Nakum said the raid was conducted following a tip-off received by police inspector Atul Sonara. Acting on the information, SOG teams raided Plot No. I-33 in Sachin GIDC and busted the duplicate ghee unit equipped with modern machinery.
Two persons â Bharat Polra (49) and Amin Vadhwaniya (45) â were arrested for running the unit for the past two years. Police said the accused used a small quantity of pure ghee and mixed it with palm oil, vanaspati (hydrogenated vegetable oil) and flavouring essence to produce larger quantities of so-called cow ghee under the âVidur' brand. 
Investigators found that 1 kg of pure ghee was mixed with about 14 kg of other ingredients to produce nearly 15 kg of adulterated ghee.
Officials said the accused also customised the quality according to orders. If buyers demanded inferior-quality ghee, they produced variants costing as low as Rs 300 per kg. The ghee was sold in bulk to kirana stores, dhabas, hotels located along highways and in industrial areas, as well as in markets across villages and towns in South Gujarat.
Food safety officers were called to the site after the raid and confirmed that the unit was manufacturing adulterated ghee without the required permissions.
Police also found that large quantities of the manufactured ghee were stored at a godown in Talangpor village in Sachin. SOG teams raided the warehouse as well and seized ready-to-sell stock.
1,000kg manufactured daily
Investigators estimate that the accused had been producing nearly 1,000 kg of ghee daily for the past two years. With the product sold between Rs 300 and Rs 600 per kg, police believe the racket may have generated sales worth several crores. Based on an average price of Rs 450 per kg, the total value of the ghee sold during this period could exceed Rs 30 crore. ghee adulteration unsafe_food palm oil vanaspati flavouring essence raid seizure arrest alleged Surat, Gujarat, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant adulterated ghee seized 2,029 kg of adulterated ghee ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith duplicate ghee manufacturing unit busted a duplicate ghee manufacturing unit ghee adulteration act prov:used ghee producing ghee of varying quality adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt Plot No. I-33 raided Plot No. I-33 in Sachin GIDC and busted the duplicate ghee unit ghee adulteration method fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional producing ghee of varying quality depending on client demand Vidur ghee adulteration prov:used ghee used a small quantity of pure ghee Vidur ghee adulteration prov:used ghee used a small quantity of pure ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil mixed it with palm oil, vanaspati and flavouring essence to produce larger quantities of so-called cow ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant flavouring essence mixed it with palm oil, vanaspati and flavouring essence to produce larger quantities of so-called cow ghee33:T133d,Gujarat: Massive adulterated ghee racket busted in Surat, 2 arrested ​ thehansindia.com Surat: Officials in Surat have seized 2,029 kilograms of adulterated ghee and arrested two men after raiding a manufacturing unit in the Sachin GIDC area as part of a targeted crackdown on food adulteration.  
The Special Operations Group (SOG) on Thursday conducted the operation under “Operation Shuddhi” after receiving specific information about the sale of duplicate ghee in parts of the city.  
Following the inputs, multiple teams were formed and deployed, using technical surveillance and human intelligence to identify those involved.  
Subsequently, a raid was carried out at a factory operating under the name ‘Sabka Foods’ in the Sachin GIDC area, as well as at a godown in Talangpor of Choryasi taluka.  
Police recovered adulterated ghee worth Rs 14,19,960 and machinery, raw materials and other items worth Rs 21,61,570, taking the total value of seized property to Rs 36,36,530.  
Cash and mobile phones were also seized. The accused, identified as Bharat Polara, 48, and Amin Vadhwaniya, 45, both businessmen, were arrested from the factory.  
A case has been registered against them at the Sachin GIDC police station.  
Investigators said the accused had set up a systematic adulteration process in which small quantities of pure ghee were mixed with palm oil, vegetable ghee and vegetable butter.  
Artificial essence was added to replicate the smell of cow ghee, while synthetic colouring was used to produce its yellow appearance.  
Police said the chemicals were measured with precision, including with syringes, making it difficult to distinguish the product from genuine ghee by smell or appearance.  
During interrogation, the accused stated that production was customised to demand, with different grades supplied to traders. Lower-cost variants were made largely from oils, while higher-priced versions contained only a small amount of real ghee.  
The products were sold at wholesale prices of Rs 600 to Rs 650 per kilogram and later retailed for up to Rs 1,000.  
SOG DCP Rajdeepsinh Nakum said, “They would prepare ghee according to buyers’ demands, adulterate it, and then sell it. The ghee was mixed with palm oil, vegetable ghee and vegetable butter and sold as cow ghee. They had been operating this activity for the past two years.”  
Police said the adulterated products were packaged under names such as ‘Vidur Cow Ghee’ and ‘Desi Ghee’, in sizes ranging from small pouches to 15 kg containers.  
The accused supplied the products at lower prices to grocery shops in slum areas, as well as to hotels and roadside eateries along highways and in nearby districts.  
Authorities suspect the distribution network extended across South Gujarat and possibly beyond.  
Further investigation is underway to identify other traders and distributors linked to the operation. ghee adulteration substitution masking palm oil vegetable ghee vegetable butter artificial essence raid seizure arrest case registration alleged Surat, Gujarat, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil pure ghee were mixed with palm oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable ghee mixed with palm oil, vegetable ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable butter vegetable ghee and vegetable butter ghee fflo:hasAdulterant artificial essence Artificial essence was added to replicate the smell of cow ghee Ghee Adulteration Act in Surat prov:wasAssociatedWith Amin Vadhwaniya Amin Vadhwaniya, 45, both businessmen, were arrested from the factory. Ghee Adulteration Act in Surat prov:used ghee seized 2,029 kilograms of adulterated ghee Ghee Adulteration Act in Surat prov:wasAssociatedWith Sabka Foods raid was carried out at a factory operating under the name ‘Sabka Foods’ adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt manufacturing unit in the Sachin GIDC area raiding a manufacturing unit in the Sachin GIDC area adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt Talangpor godown as well as at a godown in Talangpor of Choryasi taluka Seizure of 2,029 kg adulterated ghee fflo:triggeredAction Arrest of Bharat Polara and Amin Vadhwaniya Officials in Surat have seized 2,029 kilograms of adulterated ghee and arrested two men Seizure of 2,029 kilograms of adulterated ghee fflo:triggeredAction Arrest of Bharat Polara and Amin Vadhwaniya Officials in Surat have seized 2,029 kilograms of adulterated ghee and arrested two men ghee fflo:hasAdulterant synthetic colouring synthetic colouring was used to produce its yellow appearance ghee adulteration method fflo:hasFraudType Substitution mixed with palm oil, vegetable ghee and vegetable butter and sold as cow ghee ghee adulteration method fflo:hasFraudType Masking Artificial essence was added to replicate the smell ghee adulteration method fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional set up a systematic adulteration process palm oil fflo:foundAt Retail supplied the products at lower prices to grocery shops34:T78e,Food Adulteration: Barnala admin imposes Rs 2L fine indiatimes.com Bathinda: The Barnala district administration has imposed a fine amounting to Rs 2.25 lakh in seven cases of selling substandard food products. The fines were imposed under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. These included substandard samples of milk cake from a Barnala-based firm; khoya from Dhanaula; mustard oil from Ghunas; cooking oil from Handiaya; another sample of mustard oil from a firm in Ghunas; mustard oil from Tapa; and paneer from a firm in Dhanaula village.
Barnala DC Harpreet Singh stated that the health department has been directed to carry out regular inspections and sampling to effectively curb adulteration in food and dairy products, including milk, paneer and edible oils. 
He stated that all collected samples are sent to the laboratory for testing and cases pertaining to substandard samples are adjudicated in the court of the additional deputy commissioner. ADC Vivek Kumar Modi stated that during the period from January to March 2026, the health department collected 29 samples of various food items. Of these, 18 samples met the prescribed quality standards, while 11 were found to be substandard. The present fines were imposed in the new fiscal starting April 1. 
MSID: 130189903 413 | mustard oil cooking oil substandard Rs 2.25 lakh fine suspected Barnala, Punjab, India Rs 2.25 lakh fine fflo:issuedBy Barnala district administration Barnala district administration has imposed a fine amounting to Rs 2.25 lakh testing fso:isPerformedAt laboratory all collected samples are sent to the laboratory for testing Rs 2.25 lakh fine fflo:targets milk cake substandard samples of milk cake from a Barnala-based firm Rs 2.25 lakh fine fflo:targets mustard oil mustard oil from Ghunas Rs 2.25 lakh fine fflo:targets cooking oil cooking oil from Handiaya Rs 2.25 lakh fine fflo:targets paneer paneer from a firm in Dhanaula village35:T2208,Hyderabad turning into capital of adulterated food thehansindia.com Hyderabad: Let’s begin with some good news: In 2019, UNESCO designated Hyderabad as a "Creative City of Gastronomy" for its rich culinary heritage, blending Telugu, Mughlai, Persian, and Turkish influences.  As a topping to that rare honour, Hyderabad was ranked 50th in the world in the 2024-25 edition of the “100 Best Food Cities” by TasteAtlas, an international guide to traditional food culture.
Alas! It is disgusting to believe that the city will slowly but surely assume the dishonour of being a city where one would get a plateful – yes, read that again – of very tasty food made with ingredients that are adulterated or contaminated in filthy surroundings, right under the nose of the authorities.  Sadly, even the authorities seem to have cultivated only their tastebuds!  
From the milk, tea consumed in the morning to the meals and tiffins or snacks enjoyed throughout the day and until late in the night, the denizens of Hyderabad are being served adulterated food, despite recently intensified raids by various government agencies. This alarming situation highlights how people are compromising their health, with dangerous ingredients finding their way to their plates, whether they are eating in swanky restaurants or at home after ordering outside food. Recent raids have led to seizure of hundreds to thousands of quintals of tainted food, mirroring the tentacles of those behind the criminal rackets involved in adulterating food.   
The situation is so alarming today that recently Chief Minister A Revanth Reddy declared that a “HYDRAA-like” force would be formed to curb adulteration of food. The stock answer of food authorities is that they lack sufficient checking staff, given the huge numbers of eateries, takeaway stalls, and street vendors. Even if we accept that view, we cannot simply digest the scale of adulteration going on in the city.     
Practically there are hardly any delicacies that can be certified as insulated from adulteration, be it the famous Hyderabadi Osmania biscuits, tea, paneer, and cream; or meat and chicken. Adulteration in food has become rampant across the city mainly due to the laxity of authorities and insufficient monitoring facilities. Usually only when neighbours raise a stink about adulteration going on in a building do the authorities step in. No one knows what happens to those caught in the act.  
If the case is not brought to its logical end, the criminals behind the racket involved in adulteration will only change the location of their facility.
Asif Hussain, a city resident, pointed out that food adulteration has now evolved into a multi-crore business. From breakfast in the morning to dinner at night, every daily food essential  - be it dairy products, packaged foods, or meat - is adulterated, posing a risk to people's health. Even supermarkets and wholesale markets places like Begum Bazar or Secunderabad are stocked with adulterated products, he adds.  
Raids by the Hyderabad Police officials and food safety personnel revealed that many food items including - biscuits, bakery items, milk products including paneer, ice cream, ghee, cream, khowa, garlic-ginger paste, pickles, chocolates, tea powder, chicken, meat, spices are adulterated or prepared with expired products, chemicals and in unhygienic conditions that pose a direct threat to public health.  
Ginger-garlic paste, an essential ingredient used in almost every dish, is at number one in adulterated products; it is prepared illegally with harmful chemicals like concentrated citric acid, Xanthan Gum and low-quality waste to bulk up products. The police have seized several tonnes of the adulterated paste during raids. In a single raid, police recently seized over 4,000 kg of ginger-garlic paste, along with 6,200 kg of low-quality raw materials worth Rs 22 lakh. On Tuesday, a video that went viral in AP, showed a man in Guntur stomping on a huge quantity of ginger in a big vessel to de-husk the vegetable.  
Gaikwad Vaibhav Raghunath, Deputy Commissioner of Police (Task Force) told The Hans India that the paste was stored in open plastic tubs, exposed to dust, flies, and other contaminants. The paste was supplied to various wholesale provisions stores and those operating food catering services.  The DCP said that normally the adulteration in food is done either to gain benefits or due lack of proper hygienic conditions of processing and storing. This ultimately ends in cheating consumers and compromising their health. He further said: “It has been observed that these stored, packed, expired and frozen products are supplied to wholesale stores, restaurants, cafes, catering service operators for functions.”  
Likewise, biscuits and other bakery items are prepared using adulterated ingredients and stored under unhygienic conditions. The DCP said biscuits were prepared using rotten eggs and including chemicals - sodium benzoate and sorbic acid, flagged as a potential carcinogenic ingredient.  
Similarly, dairy products like ghee were found to have been manufactured by mixing it with palm oil, vanaspati, and other low-quality products in Ameerpet. At a dairy unit at Bholanagar in Banjara Hills, police seized 460 kg of ghee, 70 kg of mixed ghee, 2,090 kg of cow cream, and 1,170 kg of buffalo cream. In wholesale stores in Secunderabad, police seized 3,892 kg of paneer, khowa, cream and ghee all worth Rs 11 lakh. Nearly 2,600 kgs of adulterated paneer and various chemicals were recovered in the Secunderabad raid.  
In Begum Bazar, police seized 8,300 kg of shrunken coconut powder worth Rs 21 lakh. They also seized 72 drums of various pickles including - lemon, red chilli, raw tamarind, amla, and sorrel, six drums of tomato and tamarind paste, a small drum of ginger-garlic paste and other material in Jiyaguda.  
In Mangalhat, police seized a large quantity of offal including paya, head, brain, kidney, liver and other offal of goats and sheep, about 12 tons worth Rs 10 lakh and 300 kg in another raid. Besides, 600 kg of rotten/ frozen chicken was seized.    
Ande Srinivasa Rao, Addl DCP, task force, said “The owners are storing meat for long periods in deep freezers and plastic tubs filled with stagnant water and supplying it at marriage functions, events and hotels.” In a heartening move, the city police have launched - Hyderabad Food Adulteration Surveillance Team (H-FAST) unit.  
 In the last month, the unit registered over 100 cases and seized nearly 65 tons of adulterated food items and arrested 98 individuals involved in these illegal activities. ghee adulteration palm oil vanaspati low-quality products seizure alleged Hyderabad, Telangana, India raids fflo:issuedBy government agencies recently intensified raids by various government agencies ginger-garlic paste fflo:hasAdulterant concentrated citric acid Ginger-garlic paste, an essential ingredient used in almost every dish, is at number one in adulterated products; it is prepared illegally with harmful chemicals like concentrated citric acid, Xanthan Gum and low-quality waste to bulk up products. biscuits fflo:hasAdulterant rotten eggs biscuits were prepared using rotten eggs biscuits fflo:hasAdulterant sodium benzoate biscuits were prepared using rotten eggs and including chemicals - sodium benzoate ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil dairy products like ghee were found to have been manufactured by mixing it with palm oil paneer fflo:hasAdulterant adulterated paneer Nearly 2,600 kgs of adulterated paneer paneer fflo:hasAdulterant chemicals adulterated paneer and various chemicals adulterated food fflo:hasAdulterant contaminated ingredients ingredients that are adulterated or contaminated in filthy surroundings Osmania biscuits fflo:hasAdulterant unspecified adulterant famous Hyderabadi Osmania biscuits... insulated from adulteration ginger-garlic paste fflo:hasAdulterant Xanthan Gum prepared illegally with harmful chemicals like concentrated citric acid, Xanthan Gum ginger-garlic paste fflo:hasAdulterant low-quality waste prepared illegally with ... low-quality waste to bulk up products ginger-garlic paste fflo:hasAdulterationMethod bulking with waste low-quality waste to bulk up products bulking with waste fflo:hasFraudType Dilution low-quality waste to bulk up products biscuits fflo:hasAdulterant sorbic acid and sorbic acid sodium benzoate fflo:causesEffect carcinogenicity flagged as a potential carcinogenic ingredient sorbic acid fflo:causesEffect carcinogenicity flagged as a potential carcinogenic ingredient ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vanaspati vanaspati, and other low-quality products ghee fflo:foundAt Ameerpet in Ameerpet36:T60d,Expired Mustard Oil Seized in Hazaribag Food Safety Raid | Ranchi News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Hazaribag: Acting on directives of DC Shashi Prakash Singh and additional chief medical officer Dr Shashi Jaiswal, a food safety team conducted a surprise raid at a Barhi-based business firm on Tuesday, uncovering a large stock of expired mustard oil.
Led by food safety officer Md Manjar Hussain, the team collected samples of multiple brands for chemical analysis at the state food testing laboratory in Namkum.
During inspection, officials seized 813 tins and 144 bottles of expired mustard oil. The stock was immediately confiscated and sealed on the spot. Officials also found that the trader was operating without a valid food licence. Jaiswal confirmed the seizure and said legal action would be initiated under provisions of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. mustard oil substandard prohibited_additive seizure legal action suspected Hazaribag, Jharkhand, India expired mustard oil fflo:belongsToCategory Oils expired mustard oil chemical analysis fso:isPerformedAt state food testing laboratory in Namkum chemical analysis at the state food testing laboratory in Namkum chemical analysis fso:isPerformedOn samples of multiple brands collected samples of multiple brands for chemical analysis Seizure of expired mustard oil fflo:foundAtStep Retail uncovering a large stock of expired mustard oil legal action fflo:targets expired mustard oil legal action would be initiated under provisions of the Food Safety and Standards Act37:Tcca,MP News: Over 2K Food Samples Fail Safety Tests Across State-- Highest 400 From Gwalior; Dairy Products & Sweets Among Most Adulterated freepressjournal.in Bhopal (Madhya Pradesh): Over 2,000 food samples have failed safety tests across Madhya Pradesh.
According to a report by the Food and Drug Administration, the highest number of failed samples, around 420, were reported from Gwalior.
Common Food Products
The report found that commonly used dairy products such as milk, mawa, paneer and ghee were among the most adulterated items. Experts warned that such adulteration can lead to food poisoning and may also increase the risk of diabetes, heart disease and hormonal problems.
The data is based on samples collected by mobile testing vans over the past three years, with nearly one lakh food samples tested during this period.
After Gwalior, districts like Guna, Ujjain, Bhind and Burhanpur also reported a large number of failed samples. Several other districts including Indore, Dhar, Rewa, Sagar and Sehore were also affected.
Apart from dairy products, adulteration was also found in spices and edible oils. Samples of red chilli powder, coriander powder, turmeric and soybean oil failed safety tests.
Experts warned that regular consumption of such adulterated food can seriously harm health. It may damage important organs like the liver and kidneys and can also increase the risk of serious diseases, including cancer.
Sweets like jalebi, laddoo, barfi, gajak and namkeen were also found adulterated in many districts, especially during festival seasons.
Districts such as Damoh, Bhind and Morena reported several failed samples of sweets during food safety checks.
Authorities said many sweet samples collected from local markets did not meet the required safety standards.
FDA Commissioner Dinesh Srivastava said strict action will be taken against shopkeepers and manufacturers involved.
He added that monitoring has been strengthened and mobile testing vans will continue to collect samples across the state to control adulteration. ghee adulteration alleged Gwalior, Madhya Pradesh, India milk fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy commonly used dairy products such as milk mawa fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy commonly used dairy products such as milk, mawa, paneer and ghee paneer fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy commonly used dairy products such as milk, mawa, paneer and ghee ghee fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy commonly used dairy products such as milk, mawa, paneer and ghee red chilli powder fflo:belongsToCategory Spices adulteration was also found in spices and edible oils. Samples of red chilli powder coriander powder fflo:belongsToCategory Spices adulteration was also found in spices and edible oils. Samples of red chilli powder, coriander powder turmeric fflo:belongsToCategory Spices adulteration was also found in spices and edible oils. Samples of red chilli powder, coriander powder, turmeric Food poisoning fflo:hasEffectType fflo:AcuteEffect adulteration can lead to food poisoning diabetes fflo:hasEffectType fflo:ChronicEffect increase the risk of diabetes adulterated food fflo:causesEffect cancer increase the risk of serious diseases, including cancer sweets adulteration finding fflo:foundAtStep Retail sweet samples collected from local markets38:Tb24,Over 5,000 litres of adulterated cooking oil seized in Gachibowli; expired wheat flour repackaged for sale thehindu.com Thousands of litres of adulterated cooking oil and wheat flour were seized during raids carried out by the Madhapur Special Operations Team (SOT) at two locations in Hyderabad on Monday (March 9, 2026).
The accused were identified as 46-year-old Bhanwar Ram, and his 22-year-old son Ashok Kumar, both natives of Rajasthan. According to the police, the father–son duo had been operating an adulteration racket from different premises in NTR Nagar and Vattinagulapally in Gachibowli.
During the raids which followed a tip-off, officials seized more than 5,000 litres of adulterated cooking oil, over 5,000 kilograms of wheat flour, a weighing machine, packaging material and other equipment. The total value of the seized material is estimated to be around ₹21 lakh.
Preliminary investigation revealed that the accused allegedly collected expired cooking oil of different brands and mixed it with soybean oil. The mixture was then repackaged and sold in the market under different brand names.
Police also found that expired wheat flour sourced from multiple companies was repackaged and relabelled as “Jasnath Gold Chakki Atta” before distribution for sale.
An official from the Gachibowli police said that Food Safety inspectors are expected to collect samples of the seized products and send them for laboratory testing. Based on the results, the accused will be formally booked and further investigation will be taken up.
Published - March 10, 2026 12:14 pm IST cooking oil soybean oil adulteration substitution expired cooking oil seizure raid suspected Hyderabad, Gachibowli, Telangana, India expired cooking oil fflo:isSubstituteFor soybean oil collected expired cooking oil of different brands and mixed it with soybean oil expired wheat flour fflo:isSubstituteFor wheat flour expired wheat flour sourced from multiple companies was repackaged and relabelled as “Jasnath Gold Chakki Atta” cooking oil fflo:belongsToCategory Oils adulterated cooking oil Adulteration of cooking oil and wheat flour in Gachibowli prov:wasAssociatedWith Ashok Kumar father–son duo had been operating an adulteration racket Adulteration of cooking oil and wheat flour in Gachibowli prov:used cooking oil collected expired cooking oil of different brands and mixed it with soybean oil Adulteration of cooking oil and wheat flour in Gachibowli prov:used wheat flour expired wheat flour sourced from multiple companies was repackaged Mixing expired cooking oil with soybean oil fflo:hasFraudType Substitution collected expired cooking oil of different brands and mixed it with soybean oil Adulteration of cooking oil and wheat flour in Gachibowli prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhanwar Ram The accused were identified as 46-year-old Bhanwar Ram39:T94f,Adulterated cooking oil, wheat flour worth Rs 21 lakh seized in Hyderabad siasat.com Hyderabad: The Madhapur Special Operations Team conducted raids at two locations in Hyderabad on Monday, March 9. During the raid, thousands of litres of adulterated cooking oil and wheat flour were seized.
In the case, the accused were identified as Bhanwar Ram, 46, and his 22-year-old son Ashok Kumar. They are natives of Rajasthan.
They were allegedly running an adulteration racket from premises located in NTR Nagar and Vattinagulapally in the Gachibowli area.
Large quantity of adulterated products seized
Acting on a tip-off, officials carried out raids and seized more than 5,000 litres of adulterated cooking oil and over 5,000 kilograms of wheat flour.
Police also recovered a weighing machine, packaging materials, and other equipment used in the operation. The seized items are estimated to be worth around Rs 21 lakh.
Expired oil, wheat flour repackaged for sale
As per the investigation, the accused allegedly mixed expired cooking oil of various brands with soybean oil. They then repackaged the oil to sell it in the market under different brand labels.
During the raids, police also discovered expired wheat flour which was repacked and relabelled to sell in the market.
The seized products may be tested in a laboratory, and based on the results, police will register formal cases against the accused and continue further investigation. cooking oil adulteration substandard mislabeling expired cooking oil raid seizure alleged Hyderabad, Gachibowli, Telangana, India cooking oil fflo:hasAdulterant expired cooking oil mixed expired cooking oil of various brands with soybean oil cooking oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod mixing expired oil with soybean oil mixed expired cooking oil of various brands with soybean oil Adulteration of cooking oil and wheat flour in Hyderabad prov:wasAssociatedWith Ashok Kumar accused were identified as Bhanwar Ram, 46, and his 22-year-old son Ashok Kumar Adulteration of cooking oil and wheat flour in Hyderabad prov:used cooking oil accused allegedly mixed expired cooking oil Adulteration of cooking oil and wheat flour in Hyderabad prov:used wheat flour expired wheat flour which was repacked and relabelled Repackaging expired oil and flour fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling repackaged the oil to sell it in the market under different brand labels3a:T1010,Telangana Vijaya Dairy alleges adulteration in AP ‘Vijaya’ ghee thehansindia.com Vijayawada: Telangana Vijaya Dairy chief Gutta Amith Reddy made sensational allegations against the popular Andhra Pradesh Vijaya Dairy brand, stating that ghee sold under the Vijaya Dairy label by the Andhra Pradesh Dairy Development Cooperative Federation may be adulterated with vegetable oil.
Amith Reddy in a press conference in Hyderabad on Monday claimed that a laboratory test conducted by the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) detected vegetable residues in a ghee sample sold under the Vijaya brand through a franchise arrangement of the AP federation. According to him, the Telangana dairy federation had collected the sample a few months ago and sent it for testing after receiving complaints about the product. “The test report clearly indicated the presence of vegetable deposits, raising concerns that the ghee might be adulterated,” he said.  
He warned that the alleged adulteration could pose risks to consumers and damage the reputation of the Vijaya brand, which was established during the era of undivided Andhra Pradesh and later divided between the two States after the formation of Telangana.  
Amithh Reddy also said the Telangana federation had already raised the issue with authorities in Andhra Pradesh. “I personally wrote to the Chief Secretary of Andhra Pradesh five to six months ago, highlighting our concerns about the franchise model and possible quality issues. However, we have not received any response so far,” he said.  
He criticised the franchise system adopted by the AP Dairy Federation, alleging that private companies have been allowed to manufacture and sell ghee under the Vijaya brand without direct links to cooperative milk procurement. According to him, the cooperative model followed by the Telangana federation involves collecting milk directly from farmers, chilling it through bulk milk cooling units and processing it in dairies before supplying it to consumers, hostels and government institutions.  
In contrast, he alleged that some private firms operating under franchise agreements are sourcing products from outside the State and selling them under the Vijaya label. “Such companies may not have any connection with farmers or milk procurement, yet they are marketing products using the reputation of the cooperative brand,” he said.  
Amith Reddy claimed that one such firm has been selling around 100 tonnes of ghee every month in Hyderabad under the Vijaya brand through franchise rights. He questioned whether proper quality assurance mechanisms were being followed in these arrangements.  
Referring to the recent controversy over alleged adulterated ghee used in prasadam at the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams temple, he said the issue of dairy product quality has already become a matter of national debate. “In such a situation, allowing private players to sell dairy products under the Vijaya brand without strict quality control could harm consumers and farmers,” he said.  
He emphasised that the Vijaya brand was originally built on the cooperative dairy sector and should continue to operate in the interest of farmers. ghee adulteration vegetable oil complaint filed alleged Hyderabad, Telangana, India laboratory test fso:isPerformedAt National Dairy Development Board laboratory test conducted by the National Dairy Development Board vegetable oil fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee ghee sold under the Vijaya Dairy label by the Andhra Pradesh Dairy Development Cooperative Federation may be adulterated with vegetable oil Telangana federation fflo:compliesWith cooperative model cooperative model followed by the Telangana federation involves collecting milk directly from farmers laboratory test fflo:producesIndicator vegetable deposits test report clearly indicated the presence of vegetable deposits private firms fflo:foundAt Hyderabad one such firm has been selling around 100 tonnes of ghee every month in Hyderabad franchise system fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling marketing products using the reputation of the cooperative brand3b:Ta14,Mandvi cops bust unit making spurious ghee | Surat News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Surat: A Mandvi police team on Thursday busted an alleged spurious ghee manufacturing unit at Khedpur village near Mandvi in Surat district and seized 810kg of adulterated ghee worth around Rs 6.65 lakh. Police also found packs of toilet cleaner and tobacco at the unit.
Police said the product was being sold under the brand name "Yadugiri Pure Cow Ghee", with packaging that described it as premium quality. During the raid, officers recovered about 97,000 stickers of the brand meant for ghee packs. Based on the number of stickers and containers found, police suspect it to be a large-scale racket. 
The unit operated from premises in Agreshwar City Point and had been active for the past few months. 
Investigation revealed that Hemraj Rajpurohit, 39, was allegedly running the operation from his house, police said. 
From the house, police recovered equipment and materials allegedly used for making and packing the fake ghee, including a gas stove, cooking gas cylinder, two steel containers, an electric weighing scale, synthetic food colour, heat guns, an electromagnetic induction foil capping machine and batch coding and packaging machines. 
Police also seized plastic bottles of different sizes and various stickers meant for application on the bottles. 
In addition, police seized around 1,000 toilet cleaner bottles with thousands of stickers, 1,960 tobacco pouches and about 200 litres of acid stored in four barrels. A food and drug control department registration certificate was also found at the site. 
Police said further investigation is underway to identify the source of raw materials, trace the distribution network and determine whether other products were being repackaged or mislabelled. Samples of the seized items have been sent to a laboratory for testing, after which police will decide their course of action. ghee adulteration seized suspected India, Khedpur village near Mandvi in Surat district Spurious ghee manufacturing at Khedpur prov:used ghee busted an alleged spurious ghee manufacturing unit Spurious ghee manufacturing at Khedpur prov:wasAssociatedWith Hemraj Rajpurohit Hemraj Rajpurohit, 39, was allegedly running the operation ghee fflo:hasAdulterant synthetic food colour synthetic food colour ... used for making ... fake ghee Spurious ghee manufacturing at Khedpur fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling sold under the brand name "Yadugiri Pure Cow Ghee" adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt Processing busted an alleged spurious ghee manufacturing unit3c:Ta94,Tirumala ghee row triggers political firestorm in Council thehansindia.com Vijayawada: The Tirumala laddu adulteration controversy sparked a heated debate in the Legislative Council on Wednesday with YSRCP members accusing the ruling NDA coalition of politicising the issue and alleged a nexus between Heritage Foods and Indapur Dairy.
YSRCP MLC P Chandrasekhar Reddy, speaking on alleged ghee adulteration in Tirumala laddu prasadam from 2019–2024, claimed a link between Heritage and Indapur had emerged. He alleged that on the day the controversy broke, Indapur was restructured as a co-manufacturing unit and a vice-president resigned, suggesting a coordinated cover-up. He cited Heritage’s website for resignation details.  
Finance minister Payyavula Kesav strongly objected, insisting the discussion should focus solely on adulteration during the previous YSRCP regime. He criticised dragging private entities like Heritage into the debate and urged sticking to the notified topic.  
Chairman K Moshen Raju repeatedly intervened, calling for decorum and relevance amid interruptions.Reddy continued, alleging Indapur (an Heritage associate) was disqualified in 2016 for supplying adulterated ghee under the then TDP government. He highlighted pricing anomalies: ghee supplied at Rs 321/kg earlier rose to Rs 658/kg after a government change, hinting at irregularities. He traced recent events, noting AR Dairy supplied ghee tankers in June–July 2024 (post-Model Code of Conduct), with the first delivery on June 12 after TDP took office. Irregularities flagged by TTD’s lab led to external testing. YSRCP argued the NDA was shifting blame despite procurement and testing under the current administration. Chandrasekhar Reddy also pointed to Bhole Baba Dairy (formerly Harsha), cleared in 2018 under TDP, and Premier Dairy, which supplied around 90 per cent of ghee from 2014–2019 and was reconsidered post-2024, questioning diluted norms and inconsistent standards. In response, minister Keshav defended the government’s transparency in publicising lab findings, referenced past national reports, and accused prior TTD leadership of suppressing 2022 quality issues. He said the Chief Minister acted to safeguard Tirumala prasadam’s sanctity. The session saw frequent acrimonious exchanges, with both sides accusing each other of exploiting faith and temple issues for politics. The Chairman urged order and adherence to facts and agenda. ghee adulteration external_testing alleged Tirumala, Andhra Pradesh, India Tirumala laddu fflo:hasAdulterant ghee alleged ghee adulteration in Tirumala laddu prasadam Tirumala laddu fkg:hasIngredient ghee ghee adulteration in Tirumala laddu prasadam3d:T8f6,Dairy Unit Selling Spurious Ghee Raided deccanchronicle.com The police seized a vast quantity of adulterated dairy products and manufacturing equipment. This includes 460 kgs of ghee, 70 kgs of mixed ghee, 2,090 kgs of cow cream, and 1,170 kgs of buffalo cream
Hyderabad: Police raided a dairy unit at Bholanagar in Banjara Hills and apprehended its owner, Mohammed Junaid Hussain, who was manufacturing spurious ghee by mixing it with palm oil, vanaspati, and other low-quality products.
A large quantity of adulterated dairy products and manufacturing equipment were seized from the Pride Dairy unit. The seizures included 460 kg of ghee, 70 kg of mixed ghee, 2,090 kg of cow cream, and 1,170 kg of buffalo cream.
For making substandard products, 28 tins of vanaspati oil, several used oil packets, and empty tins were recovered during the raid. The law enforcement team also confiscated two boilers, a pushing and packaging machine, and two weighing machines.
Besides, four LPG cylinders, 70 containers of different sizes containing ghee, 25 empty drums, and covers used for packaging were seized from the premises. The total value of the seized products was estimated at ₹18.26 lakh, police said. ghee adulteration seizure recall_triggered India, Hyderabad manufacturing spurious ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith Mohammed Junaid Hussain apprehended its owner, Mohammed Junaid Hussain, who was manufacturing spurious ghee manufacturing spurious ghee prov:used ghee manufacturing spurious ghee by mixing it with palm oil vanaspati prov:wasGeneratedBy manufacturing spurious ghee manufacturing spurious ghee by mixing it with palm oil, vanaspati ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil manufacturing spurious ghee by mixing it with palm oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vanaspati manufacturing spurious ghee by mixing it with palm oil, vanaspati palm oil fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee manufacturing spurious ghee by mixing it with palm oil vanaspati fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee manufacturing spurious ghee by mixing it with palm oil, vanaspati manufacturing spurious ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith Mohammed Junaid Hussain apprehended its owner, Mohammed Junaid Hussain, who was manufacturing spurious ghee mixing ghee with palm oil fflo:hasFraudType Substitution manufacturing spurious ghee by mixing it with palm oil3e:Tcc6,Hyderabad: Over 3,700 kg of adulterated dairy products seized in Banjara Hills siasat.com Hyderabad: Police seized approximately 3,790 kilograms of adulterated dairy products worth Rs 18.26 lakhs on Wednesday, March 4, in Banjara Hills, Hyderabad.
The accused, Mohammed Junaid Hussain, illegally manufactured adulterated dairy products, including ghee, cow cream, and buffalo cream. He sold them under the brand “Pride Dairy” located in the Bholanagar area of Banjara Hills, Road no 12.
Palm oil, vanaspati mixed with ghee
The police raided Pride Dairy and apprehended the owner, Hussain, aged 26, who allegedly mixed palm oil, vanaspati (vegetable oil) and other low-quality substances with the ghee to sell it.
Police seized a total of 460 kgs of adulterated ghee, 70 kgs of adulterated mixed ghee, 2,090 kgs of adulterated cow cream, and 1,170 kgs of adulterated buffalo cream.
“For adulteration, the accused was using 28 tins of Ruchi Gold Vanaspathi, as well as several used oil packets and empty tins. The law enforcement team also confiscated essential machinery, including two boilers, a pushing machine, a packing machine, and two weighing machines. Additionally, four gas cylinders, 70 various-sized basins (some containing ghee), 25 empty drums, and packing covers were seized from the premises. Total worth Rs 18,26,679,” said Additional DCP Ande Srinivasa Rao, Commissioner’s Task Force.
These adulterated products were reportedly sold as original, pure ghee to the public, hotels, and event organisers, posing a significant risk to public health.
Case filed
A case has been registered against the accused under Sections 274 (Adulteration of food or drink intended for sale) and 275 (Sale of noxious food or drink) of Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita at Masabtank police station. ghee adulteration palm oil vanaspati seizure arrest case registration alleged Hyderabad, Telangana, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil mixed palm oil, vanaspati (vegetable oil) and other low-quality substances with the ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vanaspati mixed palm oil, vanaspati (vegetable oil) and other low-quality substances with the ghee palm oil fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee mixed palm oil, vanaspati (vegetable oil) and other low-quality substances with the ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant adulterated ghee These adulterated products were reportedly sold as original, pure ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant adulterated ghee These adulterated products were reportedly sold as original, pure ghee Illegal manufacturing of adulterated dairy products at Pride Dairy prov:wasAssociatedWith Mohammed Junaid Hussain The accused, Mohammed Junaid Hussain, illegally manufactured adulterated dairy products Adulteration of dairy products at Pride Dairy prov:used ghee illegally manufactured adulterated dairy products, including ghee Adulteration of dairy products at Pride Dairy prov:used cow cream illegally manufactured adulterated dairy products, including ghee, cow cream, and buffalo cream Adulteration of dairy products at Pride Dairy prov:used buffalo cream illegally manufactured adulterated dairy products, including ghee, cow cream, and buffalo cream Adulteration of dairy products at Pride Dairy fflo:occursAt Processing illegally manufactured adulterated dairy products3f:Td91,One-Man Panel Begins Probe into TTD Laddu Ghee Irregularities deccanchronicle.com It has been asked to submit its report within 45 days
TIRUPATI: The one-man commission constituted by the state government to examine administrative lapses and irregularities in the procurement and use of adulterated ghee for Srivari laddu prasadam at Tirumala formally began its inquiry on Tuesday.
Headed by former chief secretary Dinesh Kumar, the commission was set up after the CBI-led special investigation team (SIT) – which was constituted on the directions of the Supreme Court - submitted a confidential note to the government.
The SIT had concluded its probe into the ghee irregularities and filed its final supplementary chargesheet before the ACB court in Nellore on January 22. In the last week of January, it submitted a 14-page note recommending disciplinary action against certain officials, citing their failure to exercise due diligence.
On Tuesday morning, Dinesh Kumar and his team offered prayers at the hill temple in Tirumala and later proceeded to Tirupati, where the commission is likely to function from the Sri Padmavathi Rest House. He is assisted by retired IFS officer Munindra, retired assistant secretary to government Shiv Kumar and RTGS deputy CEO Madhuri.
N. Ravi, TTD AEO (properties cell), has been appointed liaison officer; and five staff members have been allotted by the TTD.
The government has directed the commission to examine whether there were lapses, omissions or failures in relaxation and enforcement of tender conditions, and whether decisions were taken with due diligence, recorded justification and procedural compliance. It has been asked to submit its report within 45 days.
The SIT stated that relaxation of procurement norms between 2019 and 2024 enabled supply of 68.17 lakh kg of adulterated ghee. It examined changes to tender conditions after receipt of a CFTRI report in 2022. The then TTD general manager (procurement) proposed inclusion of beta-sitosterol testing and FSSR norms, which was approved by the then executive officer.
However, within a short period, a fresh note reportedly sought removal of the FSSR conditions. The SIT did not examine in depth the reasons for this reversal.
The note recommended action against senior IAS officer Anil Kumar Singhal, former TTD additional EO A.V. Dharma Reddy and FA&CAO, O Balaji. Singhal was subsequently transferred from the post of TTD EO and was directed to report to the general administration department on February 1.
The SIT also referred to the alleged involvement of certain market committee employees, an inspector of factories, and staff of TTD warehouses and the procurement wing, who may be issued notices for further inquiry. ghee Srivari laddu prasadam adulteration prohibited_additive substandard adulterated ghee probe disciplinary action alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India Srivari laddu prasadam fflo:hasAdulterant adulterated ghee procurement and use of adulterated ghee for Srivari laddu prasadam one-man commission inquiry fflo:targets Srivari laddu prasadam examine administrative lapses and irregularities in the procurement and use of adulterated ghee for Srivari laddu prasadam one-man commission fflo:targets ghee examine administrative lapses and irregularities in the procurement and use of adulterated ghee ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Anil Kumar Singhal recommended action against senior IAS officer Anil Kumar Singhal40:T927,FSDA seizes adulterated food worth  ₹12.34 crore in UP hindustantimes.com FSDA seizes adulterated food worth ₹12.34 crore in UP
VP Singh, FSDA assistant commissioner, said strict action is being taken against those involved in misbranding, adulteration and sale of substandard food products. “We have either seized or destroyed adulterated items and oil worth ₹12.34 crore since February 20,” Singh said, adding that surveillance and sampling drives will continue in the coming days.
With Holi around the corner, the Food Safety and Drug Administration (FSDA), Uttar Pradesh, has seized adulterated food items and edible oil worth ₹12.34 crore in the last 10 days, as part of a statewide enforcement drive against food adulteration, officials said on Monday.
VP Singh, FSDA assistant commissioner, said strict action is being taken against those involved in misbranding, adulteration and sale of substandard food products. “We have either seized or destroyed adulterated items and oil worth ₹12.34 crore since February 20,” Singh said, adding that surveillance and sampling drives will continue in the coming days.
The department has stepped up inspections across the state, including Lucknow, ahead of peak seasonal demand for sweets and snacks. Residents have been urged to check packaging details, manufacturing and expiry dates, and quality certifications before making purchases.
To encourage public participation, FSDA Lucknow has released helpline numbers and digital platforms for lodging food quality complaints. Complaints can be registered at FSDA headquarters (18001805533), the Lucknow district office (+91 522 3514492), via WhatsApp (9793429747, 8756128434), the chief minister’s helpline (1076), or online at consumerhelpline.gov.in.
Officials said prompt reporting by consumers can help authorities act quickly and prevent unsafe food products from reaching the market. edible oil adulteration Seizure of adulterated food and oil alleged Uttar Pradesh, India Seizure of adulterated food and oil fflo:targets edible oil seized adulterated food items and edible oil Seizure of adulterated food and oil fflo:targets food items seized adulterated food items and edible oil Seizure of adulterated food and oil fflo:issuedBy FSDA Uttar Pradesh FSDA, Uttar Pradesh, has seized adulterated food items and edible oil41:Tc85,Kanpur Adulterated Food: Pre-Holi raids in Kanpur: FSDA seizes 9 quintals of adulterated mawa & edible oil worth Rs 29L | Kanpur News - The Times of India indiatimes.com KANPUR: In a crackdown on food adulteration ahead of Holi, the Food Security and Drug Administration (FSDA) department on Wednesday seized adulterated mawa and edible oil worth Rs 29.08 lakh and destroyed a large quantity of unsafe products.
Acting on a tip-off, a special FSDA team raided Panki Railway Station, where around 9 quintals of mawa was allegedly brought into the city via an EtawahâKanpur passenger train. On spotting the officials, labourers unloading the consignment fled the scene. The mawa, wrapped in dirty cloth and found in a highly unhygienic condition, was declared unfit for human consumption. As no one claimed ownership, the seized mawa, valued at Rs 3.42 lakh, was transported to a rubbish disposal plant and destroyed.
According to food safety officer Sanjay Pratap Singh, the action was taken in compliance with the directions of Cans the district magistrate. The special team included Rajnish Kumar Rai, Ajay Kumar Maurya, Somnath Kushwaha, Anil Kumar, Sanjay Kumar Verma and Sarika Singh.
While enroute to the disposal site, the team intercepted an e-rickshaw carrying mawa. The carrier claimed ownership, following which two samples were collected for testing, and the remaining consignment was released after a preliminary examination.
In a separate operation on Tuesday evening, another FSDA team raided a trader's shop at Sachendi and found a large stock of Amrit, Maya and Safari brand soybean oil allegedly imported from Nepal. On-the-spot testing by the Food Safety on Wheels laboratory indicated adulteration. The team seized around 15,894 litres of edible oil worth Rs 25.66 lakh.
The food safety officer said the department intensified inspections across the district to curb adulteration in edible items during the festive season and is running a special campaign to deter adulterators. edible oil adulteration unspecified adulterant seizure suspected Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India seizure of adulterated mawa and edible oil fflo:issuedBy Food Security and Drug Administration FSDA department on Wednesday seized adulterated mawa and edible oil mawa fflo:hasAdulterant unspecified adulterant seized adulterated mawa edible oil fflo:hasAdulterant unspecified adulterant seized adulterated mawa and edible oil mawa fflo:foundAt Panki Railway Station raided Panki Railway Station, where around 9 quintals of mawa was allegedly brought mawa fflo:hasAdulterationMethod unhygienic storage wrapped in dirty cloth and found in a highly unhygienic condition mawa sample fflo:collectedAt Distribution While enroute to the disposal site, the team intercepted an e-rickshaw carrying mawa soybean oil adulteration finding fflo:foundAtStep Retail raided a trader's shop adulteration in soybean oil fflo:producedBy On-the-spot testing On-the-spot testing by the Food Safety on Wheels laboratory indicated adulteration seizure of soybean oil fflo:issuedBy FSDA The team seized around 15,894 litres of edible oil seizure of soybean oil fflo:targets soybean oil The team seized around 15,894 litres of edible oil42:T637,Holi Crackdown: 30,000 Oil Packs Seized, Tonnes Of Fake Paneer Destroyed Across Uttar Pradesh businesstoday.in Ahead of Holi, authorities in Uttar Pradesh have intensified a statewide crackdown on adulterated food items to ensure festive food safety. Food Safety teams conducted raids across multiple districts, targeting fake paneer, mawa and suspicious edible oil. In Ghaziabad, nearly 2,500 kg of paneer and 200 kg of mawa were destroyed in just 72 hours. In Kanpur Dehat, officials seized around 30,000 containers of edible oil from four factories, while raids in Gautam Buddha Nagar and Saharanpur uncovered large quantities of suspected spurious paneer. Samples have been sent for testing, with authorities warning of strict action against adulterators as Holi approaches. edible oil adulteration substandard seizure suspected Kanpur Dehat, Uttar Pradesh, India Destruction of 2,500 kg paneer and 200 kg mawa fflo:inRegion Ghaziabad In Ghaziabad, nearly 2,500 kg of paneer and 200 kg of mawa were destroyed Seizure of 30,000 edible oil containers in Kanpur Dehat fflo:inRegion Kanpur Dehat In Kanpur Dehat, officials seized around 30,000 containers of edible oil suspected spurious paneer finding fflo:inRegion Gautam Buddha Nagar raids in Gautam Buddha Nagar and Saharanpur uncovered large quantities of suspected spurious paneer uncovered large quantities of suspected spurious paneer fflo:inRegion Saharanpur raids in Gautam Buddha Nagar and Saharanpur uncovered large quantities of suspected spurious paneer fso:Analysis fso:isPerformedOn Samples Samples have been sent for testing43:T19d8,The ghee keeping Andhra on the boil thehindu.com The alleged adulteration of the ghee used for the laddu prasadam at the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) has been in the news for more than a year for all the wrong reasons.
The controversy began in September 2024 when Chief Minister N. Chandrababu Naidu alleged that adulterated ghee, laced with animal fat including beef tallow, had been supplied to the temple during the previous YSRCP regime. The charge triggered outrage.
In October 2024, the YSRCP approached the Supreme Court, seeking a probe. The Court constituted a Special Investigation Team (STI) headed by the Central Bureau of Investigation, with members from the State police and the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI). After 15 months, the SIT filed its final supplementary charge sheet in mid-January 2026 before the Anti-Corruption Bureau Court in Nellore.
The contents of the charge sheet appear to have unsettled the NDA, as certain ingredients reportedly identified in samples tested by the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) were not mentioned in the document. On the other hand, the YSRCP was quick to claim vindication, with some leaders projecting the SIT findings as a “clean chit” to the previous regime led by Y. S. Jagan Mohan Reddy.
Yet, the SIT report was far from exculpatory. It confirmed adulteration and went so far as to state that the product supplied was not ghee at all, but a sludge concocted by mixing palm oil and synthetic substances, along with chemicals allegedly hazardous to human health, to replicate the texture and aroma of ghee. Leaders of the NDA held a press conference to counter the Opposition’s narrative.
The controversy spilled into the Legislative Council, where the YSRCP used its numerical strength to stall proceedings. It also dragged Heritage Foods, owned by Mr. Naidu’s family, into the controversy, alleging that it had attempted to benefit from the ghee supply contract.
Stripped of political rhetoric, however, the SIT’s findings are shocking. The NDDB’s Centre for Analysis and Learning in Livestock and Food at Anand, Gujarat, tested samples from four tankers supplied by one of the accused dairies. The low levels of butyric acid indicated a “very low” presence of milk fat, while the detection of lauric and myristic acids suggested the presence of coconut oil or palm kernel oil. The investigation concluded that several private dairies had colluded with officials in the TTD’s procurement wing and with external experts engaged to inspect processing units. Some dairies allegedly submitted fabricated documents to secure eligibility. Procurement records showed purchases of palm kernel oil, refined palm oil, food-grade lactic acid, acetic acid ester, monoglycerides, beta carotene and artificial ghee flavour — all with the apparent intention of manufacturing a “ghee-like” substance. The accused dairies had not procured any milk, yet managed to supply the concoction as ghee.
This is clearly a case of corruption, breach of trust, and collusion. The only direct political link cited in the charge sheet is Kaduru Chinna Appanna, who served as personal assistant to the then TTD Trust Board Chairman.
Neither side can claim moral triumph. The YSRCP asserts that it has been cleared of the gravest allegation — the presence of animal fat — and points out that none of its former TTD chairpersons has been named in the charge sheet. Yet it cannot evade accountability for the procurement of some 58 lakh kgs of fake ghee during its tenure.
Meanwhile, the NDA insists that corruption has been exposed. However, the absence of any reference to animal fat places it in an uncomfortable position. Also, its claim that policy changes under the YSRCP regime enabled dubious suppliers appears weak, since some of the same dairies operated during the earlier TDP government.
A one-man committee has now been appointed to examine the administrative lapses and procedural loopholes highlighted in the SIT’s note to the State government. While the law must take its course, attempts to weaponise the controversy are disquieting. This is a case of blatant corruption, and most important, a matter of public health. Millions who have the Tirumala laddu as prasadam deserve answers. While institutions managing temple trusts must be insulated from political crossfire, the institutions themselves must be stringent about quality control.
Published - February 25, 2026 01:15 am IST ghee adulteration substitution beef tallow palm oil refined palm oil charge sheet filed alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant beef tallow adulterated ghee, laced with animal fat including beef tallow beef tallow fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee adulterated ghee, laced with animal fat including beef tallow ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil the product supplied was not ghee at all, but a sludge concocted by mixing palm oil and synthetic substances ghee fflo:hasAdulterant refined palm oil Procurement records showed purchases of palm kernel oil, refined palm oil, food-grade lactic acid, acetic acid ester, monoglycerides, beta carotene and artificial ghee flavour — all with the apparent intention of manufacturing a “ghee-like” substance. ghee fflo:foundAt Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams ghee used for the laddu prasadam at the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams ghee fflo:hasAdulterant synthetic substances mixing palm oil and synthetic substances ghee fflo:hasAdulterant chemicals along with chemicals allegedly hazardous to human health ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod mixing palm oil and synthetic substances sludge concocted by mixing palm oil and synthetic substances mixing palm oil and synthetic substances fflo:hasFraudType Substitution product supplied was not ghee at all ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm kernel oil detection of lauric and myristic acids suggested the presence of coconut oil or palm kernel oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant food-grade lactic acid purchases of palm kernel oil, refined palm oil, food-grade lactic acid ghee fflo:hasAdulterant acetic acid ester purchases of ... acetic acid ester ... with the apparent intention of manufacturing a ghee-like substance ghee fflo:hasAdulterant monoglycerides purchases of palm kernel oil, refined palm oil, food-grade lactic acid, acetic acid ester, monoglycerides ghee fflo:hasAdulterant artificial ghee flavour purchases of ... artificial ghee flavour ... with the apparent intention of manufacturing a ghee-like substance manufacturing a ghee-like substance fflo:hasFraudType Substitution supply the concoction as ghee44:Tff0,Tirumala Laddu Ghee Adulteration: Naidu, Pawan alleges organised conspiracy behind Tirumala laddu ghee adulteration | Vijayawada News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Vijayawada: Andhra Pradesh chief minister 
N Chandrababu Naidu on Tuesday alleged in the Legislative Assembly that an organised conspiracy was behind the adulteration of ghee used in preparing Tirumala laddu prasadam during the previous YSR Congress Party (YSRCP) regime. Naidu described the sacrilege of Lord Venkateswara's prasadam as "Mahapaap" (great sin).
During a short discussion in the assembly on the alleged ghee adulteration case, the ruling NDA coalition mounted a sharp attack on YSRCP over the laddu ghee issue. Naidu said the issue was not limited to "one laddu" and that forensic findings established the scale of the irregularities.
Naidu claimed that 59.71 lakh kg of adulterated ghee was used to prepare 20 crore laddus between 2019 and 2024, costing around Rs 235 crore. He told the house that the adulteration involved the active participation of officials, technical experts, and a syndicate of suppliers. He said the CBI was close to filing a chargesheet on Jan 23, which was submitted to the supreme court a day earlier.
The chief minister stated that attacks on Hindu temples started during the tenure of former chief minister Y S Rajasekhara Reddy. Orders were issued by the then Panchayat Raj secretary to limit the seven hills of Tirumala to just two hills. 
This decision prompted strong protests from Hindus across the country for two years, and due to their efforts, the govt was eventually forced to backtrack.
Rebuking the allegation levelled against Heritage, a company owned by his family, Naidu said no Heritage products had been supplied to any govt department to date. He claimed that attempts were made to link the ghee issue with Heritage Dairy with malicious intent. He said Heritage stood on ethics and integrity without govt support. Clarifying Indapur Dairy's links with Heritage, Naidu said the company in Pune did co-manufacturing for many reputed companies.
Speaking on the issue, deputy chief minister 
Pawan Kalyan said that the CBI-led investigation confirmed that no milk was used in the production of the ghee supplied for laddu preparation. Kalyan also noted that tender norms were altered to favour preferred companies.
Following the revised norms, companies, including Bhole Baba and its associated entities, Mahalakshmi, Ganga, and Vaishnavi Dairy, received the contract between 2020 and 2023 despite not producing any ghee from milk, as stated in the SIT chargesheet.
Kalyan said about 110 crore devotees visited Tirumala between 2019 and 2024, and nearly 48 crore laddu units were sold. Of these, around 20 crore laddus were prepared using the adulterated ghee, based on TTD records placed before the assembly. He described the whole episode as an attack on the Hindu faith. If this happened to any other faith, it would become a huge issue across the country, he said, and called for unity among Hindus to step up in condemning such cowardly acts. ghee laddu adulteration adulterated ghee chargesheet filing alleged Tirumala, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India Tirumala laddu fflo:hasAdulterant ghee adulteration of ghee used in preparing Tirumala laddu prasadam Tirumala laddu ghee adulteration finding fflo:foundAtStep Processing adulteration of ghee used in preparing Tirumala laddu prasadam Tirumala laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith officials adulteration involved the active participation of officials Tirumala laddu ghee adulteration fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional organised conspiracy was behind the adulteration CBI chargesheet fflo:citesFinding Tirumala laddu ghee adulteration CBI was close to filing a chargesheet Tirumala laddu ghee adulteration prov:used Tirumala laddu 20 crore laddus were prepared using the adulterated ghee Tirumala laddu fflo:hasAdulterant adulterated ghee 20 crore laddus were prepared using the adulterated ghee ghee substitution method fflo:hasFraudType Substitution not producing any ghee from milk45:T883,Tirupati TTD temple to get Rs 25 crore French ‘e-tongue, e-nose’ to test prasadam ghee quality indiatimes.com TTD administers the world-famous Sri Venkateswara Swamy temple in Tirupati, where lakhs of devotees consume the sacred laddu prasadam every day. A row had erupted in 2024 after it was claimed that adulterated ghee was supplied to the temple. CBI filed a chargesheet on the same in January this year.
Andhra Pradesh Health Minister Satya Kumar Yadav said the ultra-modern laboratory, being established at a cost of Rs 25 crore, is nearly 90% complete and is expected to become operational next month.
In an official release, Yadav said the advanced electronic systems will be capable of detecting even microscopic levels of quality deterioration in ghee and other ingredients. “The e-tongue and e-nose-equipped ultra-modern food laboratory can identify even micro-level changes in quality. These facilities will soon be available in Tirumala,” he said.
All about the French lab
The e-tongue system scientifically analyses taste patterns with high precision and can detect subtle deterioration or adulteration in ghee and other raw materials. Similarly, the e-nose system evaluates aroma profiles, enabling authorities to identify impurities or defects by replicating the sensory functions of the human nose.The laboratory will function through specialised microbiology, chemistry, and sensory analysis divisions and will house about 50 advanced testing instruments. Around 40 personnel from the health department and TTD will be deployed to ensure smooth operations.
Currently, only a limited number of laboratories in India have such advanced sensory testing systems. Officials said the Tirumala facility will be the first ultra-modern food testing laboratory of its kind at a major pilgrim centre in Andhra Pradesh. ghee adulteration substitution chargesheet alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India e-tongue fflo:producesIndicator taste patterns e-tongue system scientifically analyses taste patterns e-nose fflo:producesIndicator aroma profiles e-nose system evaluates aroma profiles chargesheet fflo:issuedBy CBI CBI filed a chargesheet on the same46:T1433,Tirumala laddu ghee row set for stormy debate in Legislature thehansindia.com Vijayawada: The politically sensitive Tirumala laddu adulterated ghee controversy is set to come up for a full-fledged discussion in state Legislature this week, with the state government announcing that the issue will be debated in the Assembly on Tuesday and in the Legislative Council on Thursday.
The issue has repeatedly disrupted the session that began on the 11th of this month. With the YSRCP having significant strength in the Council, adjournment motions over the laddu controversy have stalled proceedings almost every day. The controversy has escalated into a direct political confrontation between the ruling NDA coalition led by TDP and the opposition YSRCP. While the TDP, along with its NDA allies, initially targeted the previous YSRCP regime over the alleged adulteration of ghee used in the preparation of Tirumala laddu prasadam, the YSRCP in recent days has turned the attack towards Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu and his family-promoted company, Heritage Foods.  
Chandrababu Naidu has maintained that he spoke on the issue only after receiving a report from the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB), which, according to him, confirmed adulteration in the ghee supplied for Tirumala laddu preparation. He said laboratory reports revealed the presence of animal fat and that the Special Investigation Team (SIT) probe established that the substance supplied was chemically manufactured and not genuine ghee. Based on the SIT findings, the government constituted a one-man committee to determine administrative responsibility. A petition filed by BJP leader Subramanian Swamy challenging the move was dismissed by the Supreme Court on Monday.  
Naidu alleged that instead of accepting responsibility, the YSRCP was attempting to divert the issue and resort to character assassination. He accused YSRCP MLCs of making baseless allegations against Heritage Foods to shield irregularities that allegedly occurred during the previous regime in the supply of ghee to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD). He asserted that those responsible for the adulteration would be brought before the law and that the matter involved large-scale irregularities.  
On the other hand, Leader of Opposition in the Legislative Council Botcha Satyanarayana alleged that the Chief Minister was linked to the scam involving Indapur Dairy and that efforts were made to benefit Heritage Foods through TTD ghee contracts.  
He claimed that Indapur Dairy and Heritage were closely associated, pointing out that Indapur was earlier listed as a manufacturing unit on Heritage’s website and later described as a co-manufacturing unit after the controversy surfaced. According to him, between 2014 and 2019, TTD ghee contracts worth hundreds of crores were awarded to Indapur Dairy, and despite alleged failed lab tests in 2016, the firm was allowed to continue supplies. He further alleged that the company did not participate in tenders during the YSRCP regime but re-entered after the coalition government assumed power.  
The YSRCP on Monday also raised questions over pricing. It alleged that ghee supplied to TTD by Indapur Dairy was priced at Rs 658 per kg, while similar products were reportedly sold in the open market at around Rs 560. The opposition questioned why TTD was paying a higher rate and how the 10 lakh kg ghee tender for 2025 was finalised.  
The opposition is also expected to raise issues relating to procurement decisions taken during the TDP regime in 2018, including the alleged induction of a private Bhole Baba Dairy into TTD through questionable certification and the reported purchase of small quantities of premium ghee specifically for aroma. With both sides preparing to present documents, reports and procurement data, the debate in the Assembly and Council is expected to be intense. ghee adulteration animal fat chemically manufactured substance constituted a one-man committee to determine administrative responsibility alleged Tirumala, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat laboratory reports revealed the presence of animal fat and that the Special Investigation Team (SIT) probe established that the substance supplied was chemically manufactured and not genuine ghee. ghee fflo:hasAdulterant chemically manufactured substance substance supplied was chemically manufactured and not genuine ghee Tirumala laddu fkg:hasIngredient ghee ghee supplied for Tirumala laddu preparation Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams fflo:foundAt ghee supply of ghee to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams adulteration in ghee supplied for Tirumala laddu fflo:supportedBy report from the National Dairy Development Board receiving a report from the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB), which, according to him, confirmed adulteration SIT probe finding of chemical manufacture fflo:supportedBy Special Investigation Team (SIT) probe Special Investigation Team (SIT) probe established that the substance supplied was chemically manufactured Indapur Dairy prov:wasAssociatedWith Heritage Foods Indapur Dairy and Heritage were closely associated47:Tc6a,CBI-SIT Probe Shows No Milk Used in Making Ghee for Tirumala Prasadam: Deputy CM deccanchronicle.com Quoting the findings of the SIT, the Deputy Chief Minister said the ghee was found to have been produced using palm oil and some chemicals --instead of from milk fat.
Vijayawada: In a sensational disclosure in the Andhra Pradesh Assembly, Deputy Chief Minister K. Pawan Kalyan on Tuesday said the CBI-led special investigation team has concluded that no milk was used in the making of ghee for TTD’s sacred laddu prasadam in Tirumala.
Quoting the findings of the SIT, the Deputy Chief Minister said the ghee was found to have been produced using palm oil and some chemicals --instead of from milk fat.
However, the investigation team informed the government that it currently lacks the knowhow to scientifically establish the precise chemical composition and origin of the substances used.
Describing the episode as a “planned conspiracy” aimed at defiling the sacred prasadam of Lord Venkateswara, Pawan Kalyan said the SIT has identified 36 accused persons. The charge sheet, he noted, details how tender conditions were allegedly diluted in a calculated manner to favour select firms.
Pawan Kalyan alleged that key eligibility norms were systematically relaxed. For instance, the contracting firm’s minimum annual turnover requirement was reduced from Rs 250 crore to Rs 150 crore; the mandatory procurement of four lakh litres of milk per day for the purpose was removed; dairy industry experience was lowered from three years to one; and the daily production capacity requirement cut from 12 tonnes of butter or ghee to eight tonnes.
Highlighting the gravity of the issue, the Deputy CM said that between 2019 and 2024, nearly 1.1 billion devotees visited Tirumala, and about 480 million laddu prasadam units were sold. Of these, nearly 200 million laddus were allegedly prepared using the so-called fake ghee, as per TTD records cited in the house.
The revelations have triggered sharp political reactions, with the government asserting that stringent action would follow. ghee adulteration investigation pending_test India, Tirumala ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil ghee was found to have been produced using palm oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant chemicals the ghee was found to have been produced using palm oil and some chemicals palm oil fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee ghee was found to have been produced using palm oil chemicals fflo:isSubstituteFor milk fat using palm oil and some chemicals --instead of from milk fat ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod substitution of milk fat with palm oil and chemicals the ghee was found to have been produced using palm oil and some chemicals --instead of from milk fat ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil ghee was found to have been produced using palm oil substitution of milk fat with palm oil and chemicals fflo:hasFraudType Substitution produced using palm oil and some chemicals --instead of from milk fat laddu prasadam fflo:hasAdulterant fake ghee 200 million laddus were allegedly prepared using the so-called fake ghee laddu prasadam fflo:hasAdulterant fake ghee laddus were allegedly prepared using the so-called fake ghee48:T12a7,20 crore Tirumala laddus made with adulterated ghee, Naidu tells Assembly thehindu.com Chief Minister N. Chandrababu Naidu stated in the Legislative Assembly that nearly 20 crore Tirumala laddus were prepared using adulterated ghee during the previous regime, describing the episode as a “Mahapaapam” (great sin).
He said 20.01 crore laddus were allegedly made with compromised ingredients, deeply affecting the faith of devotees of Lord Sri Venkateswara. Citing the findings of a CBI-supervised Special Investigation Team (SIT), he noted that between 2019 and 2024, about 59.71 lakh litres of adulterated ghee was used, involving alleged irregularities worth Rs. 231.51 crore.
The Chief Minister further said that tender norms had been relaxed to favor certain firms. Requirements such as annual turnover, milk procurement capacity, production experience, and technical scrutiny were reduced or removed, enabling inexperienced suppliers to enter the system. Bribes were paid, laboratory reports were forged, and oversight mechanisms bypassed , he alleged.
'Assault on faith'
Stating that devotees had repeatedly complained about declining quality of prasadam, Mr. Naidu questioned whether such large-scale irregularities could have occurred without the knowledge of the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) Board. ‘’It is an assault on religious faith rather than a mere administrative lapse,’’ he said, adding reforms began only after the coalition government assumed office. '’Srivari laddu quality has been improved, ingredients procured with food safety certification, annadanam standards restored, and modern crowd management systems introduced,'’ he asserted.
Responding to allegations regarding Heritage Foods, Mr. Naidu clarified that the '’company has no government procurement contracts related to ghee'’ and denied any connection to the adulteration controversy.
Offenders must be punished: Pawan
Deputy Chief Minister Pawan Kalyan condemned the adulteration as a premeditated act to defile the prasadam. Citing the NDDB report, he noted the presence of animal fats, while the SIT reportedly found no real ghee, alleging it was manufactured with palm oil and chemicals. The SIT investigation found 6.8 million kilograms of adulterated ghee was used, producing nearly 20.10 crore defective laddus out of 48.76 crore sold between 2019 and 2024, affecting 11 crore devotees, he said, adding, “Those misusing temple funds or defiling offerings must face punishment.'’
Citing a verse from Amuktamalyada, penned by Sri Krishnadevaraya, the Deputy Chief Minister warned that those entrusted with temple revenues must be principled and detached; otherwise, misappropriation of God’s wealth leads to ruin. Similar misconduct occurred under the previous government, he said. , Urging prompt action to prevent further sacrilege, he said, “When Hindu Dharma is attacked, if people do not condemn it openly beyond language, caste, and regional differences, such a trend will continue.”
Endowments Minister Anam Ramanarayana Reddy also highlighted the role of AR Dairy and affiliates in supplying adulterated ghee. Following complaints, a case was registered under charges of food adulteration, fraud, and conspiracy, and the SIT revealed forgery, destruction of records, and systemic corruption, demonstrating the need for strict oversight and accountability, he said.
Published - February 24, 2026 08:10 pm IST ghee Tirumala laddu adulteration adulterated ghee case registered alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India Tirumala laddu fflo:hasAdulterant adulterated ghee 20 crore Tirumala laddus made with adulterated ghee Tirumala laddus fflo:hasAdulterant adulterated ghee 20 crore Tirumala laddus made with adulterated ghee Supplying adulterated ghee by AR Dairy prov:wasAssociatedWith AR Dairy role of AR Dairy and affiliates in supplying adulterated ghee adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt Processing laddus were prepared using adulterated ghee adulteration of Tirumala laddu prov:wasAssociatedWith Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams irregularities could have occurred without the knowledge of the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fats presence of animal fats ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil manufactured with palm oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant chemicals manufactured with palm oil and chemicals adulteration of ghee fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional premeditated act to defile the prasadam ghee adulteration method fflo:hasFraudType Substitution found no real ghee, alleging it was manufactured with palm oil SIT investigation fflo:foundIn Tirumala laddu producing nearly 20.10 crore defective laddus ghee adulteration method fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional charges of food adulteration, fraud, and conspiracy49:T7f5,Over 20 crore Laddus Were Made With Adulterated Ghee: Chandrababu Naidu deccanchronicle.com To avoid political controversy, a Special Investigation Team (SIT) was constituted with Central and state government officials. The Supreme Court suggested that the SIT should be monitored by CBI
Chief Minister N. Chandrababu Naidu said that over 20 crore laddus were made with adulterated ghee during the YSRC rule. Officials and experts together conspired in the scam. Naidu was speaking in the brief discussion on Tirumala laddu in the Assembly on Tuesday. During the discussion, Naidu made a PowerPoint presentation titled 'Maha Papam' in the Assembly over the laddu-making with adulterated ghee.
To avoid political controversy, a Special Investigation Team (SIT) was constituted with Central and state government officials. The Supreme Court suggested that the SIT should be monitored by CBI. The CBI submitted a report recommending action against the guilty officials. So it has been decided that a single-member committee should be formed. The YSRC leaders made mistakes in several other issues. Between 2019 and 2024, 59.71 lakh litres of adulterated ghee was used to make laddus and anomalies worth Rs 231.5 crore occurred. Food Safety regulations were violated. The entire episode was orchestrated with precision to siphon crores of rupees. Those involved in procuring the ingredients for making laddus compromised on the quality of ghee used for it. The report was hid because it clearly mentioned about the adulterated ghee, Naidu said.
The CM made it clear that he did not declare that animal fat was used in the laddu making. "I only revealed what was mentioned in the NDDB report." ghee adulteration adulterated ghee SIT constituted alleged Tirumala, Andhra Pradesh, India laddu fflo:hasAdulterant adulterated ghee 20 crore laddus were made with adulterated ghee adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt Processing laddu-making with adulterated ghee adulterated ghee finding fflo:supportedBy NDDB report what was mentioned in the NDDB report4a:Tbc8,Food safety teams seize adulterated khoya in Agra, edible oil in Mânagar | Agra News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Agra: As part of an ongoing crackdown on food adulteration, authorities seized and destroyed 1,320 kg of adulterated khoya in Agra and confiscated nearly 12,000 litres of adulterated edible oil in Muzaffarnagar over the past two days, officials said on Saturday.
In Agra, the district administration intercepted a pickup van carrying adulterated khoya from Rajasthan around 8 am on Shamshabad Road. A Food Safety and Drug Administration (FSDA) team seized 22 containers of khoya, each weighing 60 kg and valued at about Rs 2.37 lakh. On-the-spot testing by an FSDA mobile laboratory found the stock unfit for human consumption, following which the entire consignment was destroyed at the Bamrauli Katara dumping zone.
 Two statutory samples were sent for laboratory analysis. 
Driver Narayan Singh from Rajasthan's Dholpur district said the consignment belonged to state-based dairy trader Rajan Singh. Legal action under the Food Safety and Standards Act is underway. 
Meanwhile, in Muzaffarnagar, a food safety team raided a cooking oil unit operating as Kavya Trading on the Shamli Bypass and seized around 12,000 litres of adulterated edible oil worth about Rs 15 lakh. The premises were sealed, and eight samples of mustard oil, rice bran oil and colouring material were collected for testing. Officials said further action would depend on laboratory reports, with criminal proceedings likely if the oil is found toxic. 
Additional district magistrate Sanjay Singh said a joint enforcement team carried out the raid as part of ongoing action against food adulteration. edible oil mustard oil rice bran oil adulteration colouring material seizure premises sealed criminal proceedings likely suspected Muzaffarnagar, Uttar Pradesh, India Khoya Seizure Agra prov:wasAttributedTo Rajan Singh consignment belonged to state-based dairy trader Rajan Singh IncidentFinding: Khoya Seizure Agra fflo:foundIn khoya seized and destroyed 1,320 kg of adulterated khoya IncidentFinding: Khoya Seizure Agra fflo:foundAtStep Distribution intercepted a pickup van carrying adulterated khoya IncidentFinding: Khoya Seizure Agra fflo:inRegion Agra seized and destroyed 1,320 kg of adulterated khoya in Agra IncidentFinding: Khoya Seizure Agra fflo:triggeredAction Legal action under Food Safety and Standards Act Legal action under the Food Safety and Standards Act is underway IncidentFinding: Oil Seizure Muzaffarnagar fflo:foundIn edible oil confiscated nearly 12,000 litres of adulterated edible oil IncidentFinding: Oil Seizure Muzaffarnagar fflo:foundAtStep Processing raided a cooking oil unit operating as Kavya Trading IncidentFinding: Oil Seizure Muzaffarnagar fflo:inRegion Muzaffarnagar confiscated nearly 12,000 litres of adulterated edible oil in Muzaffarnagar IncidentFinding: Oil Seizure Muzaffarnagar prov:wasAttributedTo Kavya Trading raided a cooking oil unit operating as Kavya Trading4b:T687,Bikaner raid seizes 765kg adulterated ghee | Jaipur News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Jaipur: The health dept Saturday busted a unit allegedly producing adulterated ghee in Nokha town of Bikaner district and seized 765 kg stock during the raid.
Food safety commissioner T Shubhmangala said a team led by additional commissioner Bhagwat Singh inspected Messrs Shri Maruti Food Product at RIICO Industrial Area, Nokha. The owner, Mukesh Pareek, told officials that cream sourced from Gujarat was heated to make ghee, sold under the Today Choice brand at Rs 410â420 per litre.
Officials said the rate was significantly lower than the prevailing market price of around Rs 525 per litre, raising suspicion of adulteration. One sample was collected for testing under the Food Safety and Standards (FSS) Act.
In separate action in Bikaner, teams collected samples of namkeen and kesar bati from Messrs Yuvraj Food Product in Phad Bazaar. Additionally, one sample of refined groundnut oil was taken from NUCHEM Food in Khara Industrial Area, Bikaner. ghee adulteration seizure suspected India, Nokha town, Bikaner district ghee fflo:hasIngredient cream cream sourced from Gujarat was heated to make ghee alleged ghee adulteration at Messrs Shri Maruti Food Product prov:wasAssociatedWith Mukesh Pareek The owner, Mukesh Pareek, told officials that cream sourced from Gujarat was heated to make ghee alleged ghee adulteration at Messrs Shri Maruti Food Product prov:used ghee producing adulterated ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant unknown adulterant in ghee producing adulterated ghee unknown adulterant in ghee fflo:foundAt Processing producing adulterated ghee in Nokha town4c:T8b7,Former TTD Chief Calls One-Man Panel On Ghee Issue A Political Move deccanchronicle.com Addressing the media here, Bhumana said the commission had been constituted despite an ongoing CBI-SIT inquiry into the issue: Reports
TIRUPATI: Former Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) chairman and YSRC) senior leader Bhumana Karunakar Reddy on Friday criticised the state government for appointing a one-man commission to probe the alleged adulterated ghee issue linked to TTD, describing it as a political move.
Addressing the media here, Bhumana said the commission had been constituted despite an ongoing CBI-SIT inquiry into the issue. He alleged that the SIT had already examined the matter across multiple states and submitted recommendations, which had not been made public. He claimed the one-man panel announced with a 45-day timeframe was aimed at creating a political narrative.
Referring to the Vaikunta Ekadasi stampede incident, Bhumana said a similar one-man commission in the past had failed to yield meaningful results. He alleged that attempts were being made to politically target former chief minister Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy, former TTD chairman Y.V. Subba Reddy and himself in connection with the ghee controversy.
The former TTD chief said ghee was supplied to TTD between 2013 and 2019 by Premier Dairy under earlier contracts. Questioning subsequent procurement decisions, he alleged that the Karnataka Milk Federation had secured a tender to supply 20 lakh kg of ghee but supplied only 10 lakh kg, and that allocation was later made to another dairy despite it being a single tender. He also referred to tenders awarded to an Indapur-based dairy firm at ₹658 per kg.
Bhumana further alleged that recent administrative changes in TTD, including the transfer of a former executive officer and leave granted to another official, were linked to attempts to defame political opponents. He accused the government of undermining judicial processes and said the commission was intended to run misleading narratives through sections of the media. ghee adulteration probe alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India one-man commission fflo:targets ghee one-man commission to probe the alleged adulterated ghee issue4d:T11a6,Sale of adulterated coconut oil: farmers elated over SHRC’s intervention thehindu.com Farmers in the upland areas of Kozhikode district have welcomed the intervention of the State Human Rights Commission (SHRC) following complaints regarding the alleged large-scale manufacture and sale of adulterated coconut oil in various parts of the State. They said the move reflected the mounting anxiety among consumers, particularly, in rural areas, over escalating prices and declining product quality.
Acting on a petition over the sale of impure coconut oil in north Kerala districts, the Commission directed the Food Safety Commissioner to conduct an urgent inquiry and file a report within 15 days. The matter would be considered at the Commission’s next sitting at the PWD Rest House in Kozhikode.
“We were expecting strong action against the unfair trade practice. There should also be flash inspections at units producing adulterated coconut oil,” said A.K. Vijayan, a coconut farmer from Kuttiyadi. He added that a ban on a few illegal brands alone would have a lasting impact.
In the order, SHRC judicial member K. Byjunath observed that complaints about the sale of adulterated oil at prices significantly lower than that of genuine coconut oil warranted immediate scrutiny by an expert team. Drawing the Commission’s attention, the petitioners contended that certain distributors in Kozhikode city, Wayanad district, and Vadakara village were supplying substandard oil at rates far below the prevailing market price of nearly ₹400 a kg for pure coconut oil, raising serious public health concerns.
The complainants further alleged the involvement of supply chains with links beyond Kerala in pushing the suspected products into local markets. Small-scale mill owners and farmers also voiced concern over the price disparity, warning that such practices could undermine traditional coconut-based livelihood and destabilise the agrarian economy.
Though the Food Safety department had recently intensified inspections and seized adulterated consignments in its enforcement drives, the protesting farmers said the Commission’s directive would add urgency and accountability to maintain the process and step up vigil. They also pointed out that the department squads’ action five years ago had led to the ban of over 40 illegal oil brands in the State.
“The main buyers of the polluted edible oil are a few hoteliers who cash in on the sale of cheap products. There are also wayside eateries and junk food outlets that depend on the steady supply of adulterated oil,” said V. Philip, a farmer from Kutityadi. He added that there were even hoteliers who increased the price of food items citing the high price of coconut oil, hiding the fact that they were using adulterated oil.
Published - February 19, 2026 07:00 pm IST coconut oil adulteration substandard adulterated coconut oil urgent inquiry directive suspected Kozhikode, Kerala, India coconut oil fflo:hasAdulterant adulterated coconut oil sale of adulterated coconut oil in various parts of the State adulterated oil fflo:foundAt wayside eateries wayside eateries and junk food outlets that depend on the steady supply of adulterated oil adulterated oil fflo:foundAt junk food outlets junk food outlets that depend on the steady supply of adulterated oil urgent inquiry directive fflo:issuedBy State Human Rights Commission Commission directed the Food Safety Commissioner to conduct an urgent inquiry urgent inquiry directive fflo:issuedBy State Human Rights Commission Commission directed the Food Safety Commissioner to conduct an urgent inquiry coconut oil fflo:hasAdulterant adulterated coconut oil petition over the sale of impure coconut oil in north Kerala districts adulterated oil fflo:foundAt Retail wayside eateries and junk food outlets that depend on the steady supply of adulterated oil adulterated oil fflo:foundAt hoteliers The main buyers of the polluted edible oil are a few hoteliers Using adulterated oil while citing high coconut oil prices fflo:hasFraudType Masking hoteliers who increased the price of food items citing the high price of coconut oil, hiding the fact that they were using adulterated oil using adulterated oil while claiming high coconut oil prices fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling hiding the fact that they were using adulterated oil seizure of adulterated consignments fflo:issuedBy Food Safety department Food Safety department had recently intensified inspections and seized adulterated consignments4e:Tac7,Jagan slams Naidu over â_x0080__x0098_inflatedâ_x0080__x0099_ budget, says TTD ghee scam happened in Naiduâ_x0080__x0099_s tenure | Vijayawada News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Vijayawada: YSRCP president and former chief minister Y S 
Jagan Mohan Reddy alleged that the state budget for 2026-27 was "a bundle of lies" and accused chief minister 
N Chandrababu Naidu of attempting to divert attention from alleged irregularities in the supply of adulterated ghee.
Addressing the media here on Thursday, Jagan claimed that all irregularities in ghee procurement by TTD occurred during Naidu's tenure and alleged a nexus between a dairy owned by Naidu's family and Indapur Foods. He alleged that disqualified firms were allowed to take part in the tenders, rejected tankers were accepted, and contracts were awarded at inflated rates during Naidu's regime.
The former CM said that Naidu's family-owned dairy altered its status from a manufacturing unit to a co-manufacturing unit after Indapur Foods' name surfaced in the scandal, and awarded a ghee supply contract at Rs 650 per kg, even though the same firm earlier supplied at Rs 278 and Rs 321 per kg. He alleged that during the previous TDP term, favoured firms were encouraged and restrictions were relaxed.
Referring to the Tirupati laddu controversy, Jagan asserted that the issue was rooted in alleged corruption in ghee supply during the previous TDP regime, and that documentary evidence was in the public domain. He accused Naidu of politicising the issue and "dragging God into politics" to shield alleged irregularities.
Jagan said the figures in the budget did not add up and alleged that projected growth rates were inflated without corresponding improvements in per capita income or living standards. He charged that allocations for key welfare schemes were inadequate and that the number of beneficiaries was steadily reduced.
He alleged that farmers, students, women, youth and employees were cheated, with sectors such as health, education, agriculture and welfare receiving insufficient support. He further claimed that the number of pension beneficiaries declined, and that allocations indicated further reductions.
"The govt mismanaged state finances and altered the budget format to obscure actual borrowing figures. While our govt implemented manifesto promises, the present administration is failing to honour its commitments. People across sections are disillusioned," said Jagan. ghee adulteration adulterated ghee alleged alleged Vijayawada, Andhra Pradesh, India supply of adulterated ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith N Chandrababu Naidu accused chief minister N Chandrababu Naidu of attempting to divert attention from alleged irregularities in the supply of adulterated ghee4f:T65f,Ready for Debate on TTD Ghee Issue in assembly: AP Home Minister thehansindia.com Andhra Pradesh Home Minister Vangalapudi Anitha stated that the government is prepared to debate the TTD adulterated ghee matter in the Assembly. She challenged YSRCP members to present evidence and affirmed the government’s readiness for any discussion in the public interest.
Anitha made her comments at the Assembly media point, emphasising that the SIT report had revealed the so-called ghee was actually a mixture of chemicals, not genuine ghee. She criticised YSRCP members for previously wasting time over the Pink Diamond controversy, which investigation confirmed did not exist.
She also highlighted that Heritage, a organisation with 34 years of history, has established rules against distributing ghee to temples from their supplies. Anitha accused opposition members of bringing unrelated issues to the House and urged them to substantiate claims with evidence. She expressed strong disapproval of their attitude towards religious sentiments, warning them not to undermine Venkateswara Swamy.
Deeply angered by claims made in witness statements, she challenged YSRCP members to discuss the awarding of contracts to companies that did not procure TTD ghee during Jagan’s administration, and what chemicals had been added to the ghee. Anitha warned against playing with sacred matters and insisted the government would not tolerate such actions. ghee adulteration chemicals debate in assembly alleged Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant chemicals SIT report had revealed the so-called ghee was actually a mixture of chemicals50:Tc35,Ghee supplied to Dwaraka Tirumala was likely adulterated: SIT chargesheet | Vijayawada News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Rajahmundry: The special investigation team (SIT), in its supplementary chargesheet, has stated that the ghee supplied to Dwaraka Tirumala temple in Eluru district was likely adulterated. 
It said that during 2022-23, Bhole Baba Oroganic Dairy and Harsh Fresh dairy products supplied thousands of kgs of adulterated ghee to Sree Vinayaka Agencies and Sumathi Traders in Tirupati between May 1, 2021 and Sep 30, 2024, through Sri Vyshnavi dairy specialities. In turn, Vinayaka Agencies and Sumathi Traders supplied the said âadulterated ghee' to various temples in Andhra Pradesh. The SIT said its investigation further revealed that Harsh Fresh dairy and Bhole Baba Oroganic dairy also supplied adulterated ghee to temples in Maharashtra.
As per the chargesheet, the SIT established the details of total supply of adulterated ghee to TTD by Bhole Baba Oroganic dairy itself and also through Sri Vyshnavi dairy, Malganga Milk and Agro Product, and AR Dairy food.
Meanwhile, Sri Venkataswara Swami Vari Devasthanam at Dwaraka Tirumala, which is famously known as China Tirupati, was also supplied ghee by Sree Vinayaka Agencies and Sri Vyshanvi dairy specialties, which allegedly supplied adulterated ghee to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams. 
Sri Vyshnavi dairy specialities reportedly supplied ghee to Dwaraka Tirumala temple through Sri Vinayaka Agencies in four spells (May '22 to Mar '23, April '23 to Sept '23, Oct '23 to Mar '24, and Apr '24 to May '24). Later, Sangam Diary started supplying ghee from May '24. 
Talking to TOI, the executive officer of Dwaraka Tirumala Devasthanam said about 1.2 lakh kilograms of ghee is used at Dwaraka Tirumala every year. Vyshnavi dairy supplied ghee at Rs 453, Rs 472.12, Rs 503.76, and Rs 532 in four spells, while Sangam Dairy has been supplying ghee at the price of Rs 590 per kilogram, Bhadraji said. However, he made it clear that payment was made only after lab testing of the product in every assignment. He said there were no complaints whatsoever from devotees on the prasadam made at the temple. ghee adulteration unspecified chargesheet filed alleged Eluru, Andhra Pradesh, India supply of adulterated ghee to TTD prov:wasAssociatedWith Malganga Milk and Agro Product supply of adulterated ghee to TTD by Bhole Baba Oroganic dairy itself and also through Sri Vyshnavi dairy, Malganga Milk and Agro Product ghee adulteration at Dwaraka Tirumala prov:used ghee the ghee supplied to Dwaraka Tirumala temple in Eluru district was likely adulterated ghee adulteration at Dwaraka Tirumala prov:wasAssociatedWith Harsh Fresh dairy products Harsh Fresh dairy products supplied thousands of kgs of adulterated ghee ghee adulteration at Dwaraka Tirumala prov:wasAssociatedWith AR Dairy food supply of adulterated ghee to TTD by Bhole Baba Oroganic dairy itself and also through Sri Vyshnavi dairy, Malganga Milk and Agro Product, and AR Dairy food ghee fflo:hasAdulterant unspecified adulterant in ghee supplied thousands of kgs of adulterated ghee51:Tc9d,McDonald’s Outlet In Jaipur Under Scanner After Food Safety Violations Found During Surprise Check; 40 Litres Of Oil & 40 Kgs Rotten Tomatoes Destroyed freepressjournal.in Jaipur: In a surprise inspection conducted on Monday, food safety officials from the Rajasthan health department uncovered serious hygiene and food safety lapses at a McDonald’s outlet located in Gaurav Tower, Jaipur. The inspection revealed that the cooking oil used for frying food had crossed safe consumption limits, raising health concerns.
Unsafe oil quality detected
During the inspection, officers tested the refined palm oil used to prepare items like French fries and other fried foods. The results showed that the Total Polar Compounds (TPC)- a key indicator of oil degradation- exceeded the permissible limit of 25%. The oil used for vegetarian food registered a TPC level of 31%, while oil used for non-vegetarian items recorded 28%, both above safe standards.
Health experts warn that oil with high TPC levels becomes toxic, increasing the formation of harmful substances, including carcinogenic compounds and trans fats. “Excessive TPC makes cooking oil dangerous for consumption and significantly raises the risk of heart disease,” Dr Manish Mittal, Chief Medical Health Officer (Jaipur-II) told TOI.
Oil found overused and unhygienic
Officials found the oil to be extremely dark, indicating prolonged reuse. Despite its poor condition, food was being fried continuously throughout the day at temperatures around 150°C. As a precautionary step, nearly 40 litres of oil were destroyed on-site, and samples were collected for laboratory testing.
The restaurant manager, present during the inspection, was instructed to immediately replace the oil and ensure compliance with food safety standards. Authorities confirmed that a formal improvement notice will be issued under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006, and further action will follow based on test reports.
Rotten vegetables discovered in cold storage
Apart from oil quality issues, inspectors also detected unhygienic storage practices. Around 40 kilograms of spoiled tomatoes were found stored in plastic crates inside the cold room. The rotten stock was disposed of immediately to prevent contamination. palm oil unsafe_food substandard Total Polar Compounds destruction of oil formal improvement notice suspected Jaipur, Rajasthan, India McDonald's outlet in Gaurav Tower, Jaipur prov:wasAttributedTo High TPC in cooking oil cooking oil used for frying food had crossed safe consumption limits refined palm oil fflo:hasAdulterant Total Polar Compounds cooking oil used for frying food had crossed safe consumption limits Total Polar Compounds fflo:causesEffect heart disease significantly raises the risk of heart disease Total Polar Compounds fflo:causesEffect carcinogenic compounds formation increasing the formation of harmful substances, including carcinogenic compounds refined palm oil fflo:hasPermissibleLimit TPC Limit 25% exceeded the permissible limit of 25% TPC Limit 25% fflo:appliesTo Total Polar Compounds permissible limit of 25% Spoiled tomatoes finding fflo:foundAtStep Storage spoiled tomatoes were found stored in plastic crates inside the cold room52:T1a81,Hindu groups, seers protest Tirumala ghee ‘adulteration’ hindustantimes.com Hindu groups, seers protest Tirumala ghee ‘adulteration’
Hindu groups protested in Tirupati over alleged ghee adulteration in temple offerings, demanding accountability and a probe into mismanagement by TTD officials.
Hyderabad Several Hindu religious organisations on Tuesday staged a protest at foothills of Tirumala hills in Tirupati district, alleging mismanagement in Tirumala by the previous regime of the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD). The stir erupted after the Central Bureau of Investigtion (CBI)-led special investigation team (SIT) submitted a report in Nellore court regarding the alleged supply of adulterated ghee to TTD.
Prominent participants in the protest included Sadhu Sant Coordination Committee convenor Atluri Narayana Rao, Sivakameswari Peetham seer Sivananda Swami, Rajeswarananda Swami, Kala Bhairaveswara Swami, Neelakantha, Anjali Mataji, Om Shri Mataji and representatives of various Hindu organisations.
Addressing protesters, Narayana Rao said adulteration of laddu prasadam was not a mere administrative lapse but a grave offence that wounded the faith of millions. He alleged that incidents reported in Tirumala over the past five years were part of deliberate conspiracies and called for a fast-track court to ensure swift punishment to the accused.
The organisations also demanded a probe by a sitting judge into all alleged irregularities and conspiracies in Tirumala during the period under scrutiny. “We want strict punishment for those responsible and long-term institutional safeguards to protect the sanctity of Tirumala’s sacred traditions,” Rao said.
Tirumala Pedda Jeeyangar Mutt head Shathagopa Ramanuja Pedda Jeeyar Swamy on Monday wrote a letter to chief minister N Chandrababu Naidu and conveyed deep anguish over the ghee adulteration issue.
Referring to confirmation by the SIT report regarding the alleged use of adulterated ghee in laddu preparation, the seer said the development caused severe shock and emotional distress to devotees.
“Tirupati laddu prasadam symbolises the spiritual faith of millions and that any compromise in its preparation amounted to a grave impropriety. The continued use of allegedly adulterated ghee even after awareness of the issue is against dharma and reflects extreme irresponsibility,” he said.
The seer expressed confidence that the chief minister would establish a robust system to prevent such lapses in future and safeguard the sanctity of temple rituals.
Sri Embar Jeeyar Swamy of Sriperumbudur in Tamil Nadu also voiced strong concern, describing the alleged use of adulterated ghee in Tirumala prasadam as a “grave injustice” to devotees.
In a video message, he said that any compromise in the purity of the Tirupati laddu amounts to a “heinous act driven by greed.” He also urged the Centre to initiate strict action against those involved and called on the Andhra Pradesh government to constitute a permanent monitoring committee for TTD.
Sampathkumara Ramanuja Jeeyar Swamiji of the Mannargudi Mutt warned that the alleged adulteration during the previous regime could have affected the health of lakhs of devotees. He demanded severe punishment for those responsible and a comprehensive probe to ascertain whether adulteration extended to other temple-related activities.
Sri Vidya Srisha Tirtha Swamiji, head of Vyasaraja Math in Karnataka, wrote to Prime Minister Narendra Modi expressing deep sorrow and urging both the Central and state governments to take firm action, stating that any lapse in preparing Tirumala laddu deeply hurt Hindu sentiments worldwide.
Meanwhile, the Enforcement Directorate (ED) has begun investigation into the Tirumala ghee adulteration case under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA), people familiar with the matter said.
The ED has registered an enforcement case information report (ECIR), based on the final charge sheet filed by the SIT, which details an alleged nexus involving private dairy firms, intermediaries and TTD officials.
The charge sheet pointed out alleged hawala-based cash transactions and illegal gratification paid by private dairy operators to the TTD officials to influence ghee procurement tenders and quality clearances.
Forensic analysis of mobile phones, WhatsApp chats and Excel records purportedly revealed documented payments routed through cash couriers and hawala operators to senior officials, including the then general manager (procurement) at TTD, along with smaller sums to other functionaries.
The chargesheet claims that ineligible dairies secured tenders by submitting forged documents such as fabricated experience certificates, manipulated Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) returns and falsified laboratory reports, often by quoting unviable low rates.
It accused the TTD officials are accused of overlooking discrepancies in exchange for bribes and issuing favourable inspection reports. “The ED will be probing the case in the money laundering angle,” an official in the endowments department said.
- Srinivasa Rao is Senior Assistant Editor based out of Hyderabad covering developments in Andhra Pradesh and Telangana . He has over three decades of reporting experience. ghee adulteration mislabeling prohibited_additive investigation_under_prevention_of_money_laundering_act alleged Tirupati, Andhra Pradesh, India alleged use of adulterated ghee in laddu preparation fflo:supportedBy SIT report confirmation by the SIT report regarding the alleged use of adulterated ghee in laddu preparation alleged use of adulterated ghee in Tirumala prasadam fflo:inRegion Tirumala alleged use of adulterated ghee in Tirumala prasadam Tirumala ghee adulteration case fflo:triggeredAction investigation under PMLA investigation into the Tirumala ghee adulteration case under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA) alleged ghee adulteration prov:wasAttributedTo Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams alleging mismanagement in Tirumala by the previous regime of the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams laddu prasadam fflo:hasIngredient ghee use of adulterated ghee in laddu preparation Tirupati laddu fflo:hasAdulterant ghee Tirumala ghee adulteration case Tirumala ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith private dairy firms alleged nexus involving private dairy firms Tirumala ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith TTD officials alleged nexus involving private dairy firms, intermediaries and TTD officials Tirumala ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith intermediaries alleged nexus involving private dairy firms, intermediaries and TTD officials Enforcement Directorate fflo:triggeredAction money laundering probe The ED will be probing the case in the money laundering angle53:T536,JSP demands action against YSRCP in Tirumala ghee adulteration issue thehindu.com Jana Sena Party (JSP) senior leaders Avanapu Vikram and Avanapu Bhavana on Tuesday (February 10, 2026) urged the government to initiate stern action against YSRCP leaders, who they charged were responsible for the usage of adulterated ghee in Tirumala Laddu Prasadam. The party organised a massive rally from Vizianagaram to Lord Rama’s historic temple Ramateertham of Nellimarla constituency to highlight the issue.
Speaking to media on the occasion, Mr. Vikram said that sanctity of Tirumala and other temples needed to be protected. He hoped that the State government’s probe would identify the culprits involved in supply of adulterated ghee for preparation of laddu prasadam.
“Jana Sena Party president and Deputy Chief Minister Pawan Kalyan was the first leader to highlight the wrongful acts that had taken place in Lord Venkateswara temple in Tirumala. Now, it is being proved without any doubt. YSRCP should offer an apology openly for hurting sentiments of Hindu community,” said Mr. Vikram.
Published - February 10, 2026 06:39 pm IST ghee Tirumala Laddu Prasadam adulteration adulterated ghee alleged Tirumala, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India Tirumala Laddu Prasadam fkg:hasIngredient ghee adulterated ghee in Tirumala Laddu Prasadam54:Tfbb,ED to probe money laundering in adulterated Tirupati laddu scam thehindubusinessline.com After the CBI-led Special Investigation Team (SIT), the Enforcement Directorate has also jumped into the fray and registered a money laundering case to investigate adulteration of ‘laddu’ sweets offered as prasad at the famous Tirumala temple in Andhra Pradesh.
Nearly 60 lakh kg of adulterated cow ghee, valued at approximately ₹250 crore, was supplied to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) during the previous YSRCP government for making of laddus, Chairman B R Naidu had said in a press conference in January.
Through the PMLA case registered some time ago, the ED is looking to probe the alleged proceeds of crime or illicit funds generated by the accused through the use of adulterated ghee, officials said.
The ED is digging into the FIR, documents and chargesheet filed recently in the case by the SIT, accusing 36 people, including nine TTD officials and five dairy experts, of indulging in a scam.
As per the findings of the SIT, the original material, which was sold to the Sri Venkateswara Swamy temple body as ghee, was chemically processed palmolein oil and other ingredients.
Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu had publicly stated in September 2024 that animal fat was used in preparing Tirupati laddus (consecrated sweets) during the previous YS Jagan Mohan Reddy-led regime in the state. This had sparked off political row.
The adulterated ghee was supplied to the TTD between 2021 and 2024. Under the cover of pure cow ghee, a mixture of vegetable oils, specifically palm oil and palm stearin, was supplied. Bhole Baba Dairy conspired along with other suppliers such as AR Dairy and Vyshnavi Dairy to ferry 68 lakh kg of “synthetic” ghee.
Officials suspect funds were diverted through hawala in this case.
Published on February 10, 2026 ghee adulteration substitution animal fat palm oil palm stearin money laundering case alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India money laundering case fflo:issuedBy Enforcement Directorate Enforcement Directorate has also jumped into the fray and registered a money laundering case Tirupati laddu fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat animal fat was used in preparing Tirupati laddus palm oil fflo:isSubstituteFor cow ghee Under the cover of pure cow ghee, a mixture of vegetable oils, specifically palm oil and palm stearin, was supplied. palm stearin fflo:isSubstituteFor cow ghee Under the cover of pure cow ghee, a mixture of vegetable oils, specifically palm oil and palm stearin, was supplied. chemically processed palmolein oil fflo:isSubstituteFor cow ghee original material, which was sold to the Sri Venkateswara Swamy temple body as ghee, was chemically processed palmolein oil chemically processed palmolein oil fflo:isSubstituteFor cow ghee original material, which was sold to the Sri Venkateswara Swamy temple body as ghee, was chemically processed palmolein oil Tirupati laddu fflo:hasAdulterant palmolein oil original material... sold... as ghee, was chemically processed palmolein oil adulterated cow ghee fflo:foundAt Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams supplied to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) adulteration of 'laddu' sweets prov:wasAssociatedWith dairy experts accusing 36 people, including nine TTD officials and five dairy experts, of indulging in a scam Tirupati laddu fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil mixture of vegetable oils, specifically palm oil Tirupati laddu fflo:hasAdulterant palm stearin specifically palm oil and palm stearin Tirupati laddu adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba Dairy Bhole Baba Dairy conspired along with other suppliers Tirupati laddu adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith AR Dairy suppliers such as AR Dairy Tirupati laddu adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Vyshnavi Dairy Bhole Baba Dairy conspired along with other suppliers such as AR Dairy and Vyshnavi Dairy Tirupati laddu adulteration fflo:inRegion Andhra Pradesh Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu had publicly stated55:T70a,7.5k ltr spurious ghee seized in Jodhpur | Jaipur News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Jodhpur: The Commissioner Special Team (CST) on Saturday raided a ghee supplier and seized 7,500 litres of spurious ghee. Police, acting on information, reached the spot and recovered palm oil, tins filled with different varieties of ghee, and printed wrappers of several well-known brands from the warehouse.
Police said Naveen Kumar (38) was detained from the spot, and an investigation has been initiated into where and for how long the spurious ghee was supplied.
CST in-charge and Sub-Inspector Mehraj Tanwar said the unit, Harshit Enterprises, operating in Anganwa Nandpuri Yojana under the Mandore police station area, was raided following a tip-off.
"We seized 350 tins of ghee of different brands and 150 tins of mixed palm oil, along with about 7,500 litres of spurious ghee from this unit," Tanwar said. TNN ghee adulteration substitution palm oil raid seizure detention investigation alleged Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India seizure of spurious ghee in Jodhpur fflo:inRegion Jodhpur 7.5k ltr spurious ghee seized in Jodhpur ghee adulteration at Harshit Enterprises prov:wasAssociatedWith Harshit Enterprises unit, Harshit Enterprises, operating in Anganwa Nandpuri Yojana ghee adulteration at Harshit Enterprises prov:used ghee seized 7,500 litres of spurious ghee ghee adulteration at Harshit Enterprises prov:used palm oil recovered palm oil, tins filled with different varieties of ghee seizure of spurious ghee fflo:foundAtStep Storage from the warehouse palm oil substitution in ghee fflo:hasFraudType Substitution recovered palm oil, tins filled with different varieties of ghee ghee adulteration at Harshit Enterprises prov:wasAssociatedWith Naveen Kumar Naveen Kumar (38) was detained from the spot56:T1320,Tirumala Laddu Row: Andhra CM Naidu claims bathroom cleaning chemicals used in the ghee meant for Tirupati laddu india.com Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu on Friday claimed that "bathroom cleaning chemicals" were used to adulterate the ghee meant for making of laddu prasadam at Tirupati Tirumala Devasthanams (TTD) during the YSR Congress Party's rule in the state.
While addressing the public event named “Mee Bhoomi–Mee Hakku” in Kurnool district, Naidu emphasized that the ghee supplied to the TTD had been adulterated with several chemicals, according to the report submitted by the CBI-led special investigation team that investigated the matter.
CM Naidu said, “The SIT report clearly mentioned that the ghee supplier to the TTD had procured various chemicals, including the one which is typically used for cleaning bathrooms and used them in the adulteration of ghee.”
He further alleged that YSRCP leaders were attempting to mislead the public by asserting that the ghee used in Tirupati laddus contained no animal fat.
Naidu also claimed that during the previous YSRCP government, adulterated ghee was supplied to the Srisailam temple for prasadam preparation and to other major temples across the state.
His statement followed allegations by YSR Congress Party leaders that he had "lied" about the Tirupati ghee being contaminated with beef tallow and lard. The CBI chargesheet, however, noted that while tallow and lard were absent, the ghee had been adulterated with plant oils and chemicals.
The Tirupati prasadam is alleged to have been adulterated between 2019 and 2024, during the tenure of the YSR Congress Party government under Chief Minister Jagan Mohan Reddy.
In its statement said, Telugu Desam Party said, “The latest revelations from the official chargesheet have sparked fresh outrage and deep anguish among devotees Tirupati laddu, exposing the horrifying truth that a toilet cleaning chemical was used to adulterate the sacred Tirupati Laddu."
Andhra's Home Minister Vangalapudi Anitha also criticised the YSRCP, saying the opposition is lying vis a vis Tirumala ghee adulteration issue.
She said, "Not one but four separate reports - from CFTRI, NDDB, NTCSI and the SIT - had confirmed adulteration of ghee used in the Tirumala laddu."
The Home Minister claimed that a chemical called “LABSA” (Linear Alkyl Benzene Sulphonic Acid), commonly used for toilet cleaning, was used in the adulteration, calling it a serious act of sacrilege.
Meanwhile, the YSR Congress Party (YSRCP) retaliated by claiming that the TDP and its chief, CM Naidu, were attempting to stir communal tensions for political advantage.
Former Andhra CM and YSRCP supremo, Jagan Mohan Reddy said that the party will reach out all possible channels, including the Supreme Court and the National Human Right Commission (NHRC), to expose the “jungle raj” of the coalition government at national level and to challenge the “misleading propaganda” surrounding the Tirupati laddu controversy.
Quoting the CBI investigation, Reddy said that the CBI, upon concluding its investigation, submitted a chargesheet confirming that the ghee used in the laddu contained no animal fat.
He further added, "Chandrababu Naidu has been dragging God into politics, and he, along with his son Lokesh and Pawan Kalyan, has been using God for selfish and political gains."
The chargesheet, backed by findings from two central laboratories, does not name any individuals linked to the YSRCP.
Stay informed on all the latest news, real-time breaking news updates, and follow all the important headlines in india news and world news on Zee News. ghee adulteration bathroom cleaning chemicals plant oils chemicals alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant bathroom cleaning chemicals "bathroom cleaning chemicals" were used to adulterate the ghee meant for making of laddu prasadam at Tirupati ghee fflo:hasAdulterant plant oils ghee had been adulterated with plant oils ghee fflo:hasAdulterant chemicals ghee had been adulterated with plant oils and chemicals bathroom cleaning chemicals fflo:foundAt Tirupati Tirumala Devasthanams adulterate the ghee meant for making of laddu prasadam at Tirupati Tirumala Devasthanams ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod adulteration with chemicals used them in the adulteration of ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant LABSA chemical called LABSA... was used in the adulteration Tirupati laddu fflo:hasAdulterant LABSA toilet cleaning chemical was used to adulterate the sacred Tirupati Laddu adulteration of ghee used in the Tirumala laddu fflo:supportedBy NDDB four separate reports - from CFTRI, NDDB, NTCSI and the SIT - had confirmed adulteration of ghee adulteration of ghee used in the Tirumala laddu fflo:supportedBy NTCSI four separate reports - from CFTRI, NDDB, NTCSI and the SIT - had confirmed adulteration of ghee57:Te04,Korean Monoglycerides Used For Adulteration of Ghee Supplied To TTD deccanchronicle.com Bhole Baba Dairy which supplied ghee to the TTD during the YSRC rule, was found to have heavily used monoglycerides, a chemical substance, in the ghee
Sourced From Korea, the Special Investigation Team (SIT) probe revealed that adulterated ghee was supplied for the manufacturing of the laddu prasadam at Tirumala. Bhole Baba Dairy which supplied ghee to the TTD during the YSRC rule, was found to have heavily used monoglycerides, a chemical substance, in the ghee. It was found that Raghubeer Saran Overseas, based in Delhi, imported the chemicals from Korea, which was later purchased by Sungandh Oil and then supplied to the Bhole Baba Dairy.
During the raids conducted in April 2025, numerous drums with 200-kg capacity each, loaded with Venus brand monoglycerides, were found on the premises of Sugandh Oil Company. The labels on the drums displayed that the monoglycerides were manufactured at Ilshin Wells Co. Ltd. in Korea. SIT raids at Bhole Baba Dairy at Bhagwanpur in Uttarakhand also found monoglyceride stocks on the premises. The FIR mentions that monoglycerides were used in the manufacture of adulterated ghee, which was supplied to the TTD.
Monoglycerides are manufactured from vegetable oils or animal fats. As vegetable oils cost more, it is likely that the monoglycerides used in the ghee supplied to Tirumala temple contained animal fats. In the ghee samples sent to the SIT in July 2024, the NDDB-CALF labs found the presence of pig and buffalo fat in the ghee. The SIT is yet to investigate in depth into the issue.
SIT also found that Bhole Baba Dairy produced fake invoices of edible oils while it bought monoglycerides from Sugandh Oils.
SIT probe revealed that the adulterated ghee was produced mixing palm oil, palm kernel oil, monoglycerides, Betacarotene, acetic acid ester, and lactic acid. Monoglycerides are used to make the mixture look like ghee and also to enhance its shelf life, as they act as a preservative. ghee adulteration SIT probe revealed that adulterated ghee was supplied for the manufacturing of the laddu prasadam at Tirumala. The SIT is yet to investigate in depth into the issue. SIT probe revealed that the adulterated ghee was produced mixing palm oil, palm kernel oil, monoglycerides, Betacarotene, acetic acid ester, and lactic acid. pending_test India, Tirumala temple ghee fflo:hasAdulterant monoglycerides used monoglycerides, a chemical substance, in the ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant pig fat found the presence of pig and buffalo fat in the ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant buffalo fat found the presence of pig and buffalo fat in the ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil adulterated ghee was produced mixing palm oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm kernel oil adulterated ghee was produced mixing palm oil, palm kernel oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant acetic acid ester adulterated ghee was produced mixing palm oil, palm kernel oil, monoglycerides, Betacarotene, acetic acid ester ghee fflo:hasAdulterant lactic acid adulterated ghee was produced mixing palm oil, palm kernel oil, monoglycerides, Betacarotene, acetic acid ester, and lactic acid ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod Manufacturing with Monoglycerides monoglycerides were used in the manufacture of adulterated ghee Adulteration of Ghee with Monoglycerides prov:used ghee monoglycerides were used in the manufacture of adulterated ghee monoglycerides fflo:hasFunction fflo:Preservative act as a preservative monoglycerides fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee used to make the mixture look like ghee58:Tf8b,SIT faces questions over â_x0080__x0098_shortcomingsâ_x0080__x0099_ in Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration probe | Vijayawada News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Vijayawada: Amid allegations and counter-allegations between ruling and opposition parties over the laddu ghee adulteration case, the special investigation team (SIT) is now faced with multiple questions, with leaders across the political fence accusing it of potential shortcomings in its investigation. 
Ruling TDP members expressed doubts over the investigation as the SIT report, while mentioning that ghee was adulterated with synthetic materials, was silent on the use of animal fat. The questions raised relate to sending ghee samples to NDRI for testing despite two of its employees being arraigned as accused, to not including then administrative heads of the TTD as accused.
While alleging that chemicals were used to prepare a ghee-like product, finance minister Payyavula Keshav raised doubts over the source of chemical compounds. Though he did not express doubts on the SIT directly, he said it ought to have examined the source of the chemical compounds. "Chemicals like acetic acid, mono-glycerides and lactic acid, which were found in the ghee-like product, can be made either from plant-based fats or from animal fats and were imported from South Korea. It's an important aspect which cannot be ignored," he noted.
Another issue pointed out was that of not sending the ghee samples to a competent laboratory to find out whether it was adulterated with animal fats, after the NDRI stated that it lacked competence to test for the same. 
The SIT filed a final chargesheet, which is yet to be taken into cognisance by the trial court, without a conclusive finding on the most controversial issue of animal fat. The SIT mentioned in its report submitted to the govt that the officials who strengthened tender rules, made diagonally opposite set of recommendations after five months without any justification. However, the SIT did not go into the aspect of at whose instance the officials changed the tender rules.
While alleging that then chairman of TTD knew about the adulteration of ghee in 2022, and that additional EO, Dharma Reddy, failed to follow up on the test results, the SIT did not include them as accused, ruling party leaders feel. The SIT also found fault with the procurement committee comprising Chevireddy Bhaskar Reddy and Bhumana Karunakar Reddy, but did not include them in the list of accused. The SIT found fault with Anil Kumar Singhal, who worked as EO when tender conditions were relaxed, but did not examine KS Jawahar Reddy, who worked as EO when the adulteration was confirmed by the CFTRI.
Chief minister N Chandrababu Naidu said they will not spare anyone involved, as it was a deliberate wrongdoing that played with the sentiments of devotees. He said the govt will move the court seeking prosecution of all those involved in the case, if required. A legal opinion is being sought in this regard on whether to request the SIT or to file a petition before the court. As it was a Supreme Court-monitored investigation, the state govt is also exploring legal options to bring all the issues to the notice of the apex court. ghee adulteration mono-glycerides lactic acid chargesheet_filed alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant mono-glycerides Chemicals like acetic acid, mono-glycerides and lactic acid, which were found in the ghee-like product ghee fflo:hasAdulterant lactic acid Chemicals like acetic acid, mono-glycerides and lactic acid, which were found in the ghee-like product laddu ghee fflo:hasAdulterant synthetic materials ghee was adulterated with synthetic materials ghee fflo:hasAdulterant acetic acid Chemicals like acetic acid... were found in the ghee-like product laddu ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod preparation of ghee-like product using chemicals alleging that chemicals were used to prepare a ghee-like product59:T504,Naidu Accuses Previous YSRC Govt of Using Ghee Made with Bathroom Chemicals for Tirupati Laddus deccanchronicle.com Naidu Accuses Previous YSRC Govt of Using Ghee Made with Bathroom Chemicals for Tirupati Laddus
The chief minister alleged that the previous government tried to undermine the prestige of Lord Venkateswara Swamy with adulterated prasadam (consecrated food)
Kalugotla (Andhra Pradesh): Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu on Friday alleged that Tirupati laddus (consecrated sweet) were made using ghee which was adulterated with chemicals used to clean bathrooms during the previous YSRCP government.
Addressing a village meeting at Kalugotla village in Kurnool district, the chief minister alleged that the previous government tried to undermine the prestige of Lord Venkateswara Swamy with adulterated prasadam (consecrated food). ghee adulteration bathroom chemicals alleged Kalugotla, Kurnool, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant bathroom chemicals ghee which was adulterated with chemicals used to clean bathrooms Tirupati laddus fflo:hasAdulterant bathroom chemicals Tirupati laddus were made using ghee which was adulterated with chemicals used to clean bathrooms Tirupati laddus fkg:hasIngredient ghee Tirupati laddus were made using ghee5a:T967,CM Chandrababu Naidu alleges attempt to tarnish TTD’s sanctity through adulterated laddu prasadam thehansindia.com Kurnool: Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N. Chandrababu Naidu on Friday alleged that a systematic attempt was made to damage the sanctity and reputation of Lord Sri Venkateswara Swamy by preparing Laddu prasadam using adulterated ghee. He claimed that for nearly five years, laddus were prepared with chemically adulterated ghee, including substances allegedly used for cleaning bathrooms. Such actions, he said, not only hurt the religious sentiments of devotees but also aimed at discrediting the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD), one of the most revered religious institutions in the country.
The Chief Minister rejected claims that there was no adulteration, stating that while some leaders cite clean chits allegedly given by the CBI and SIT, even a close relative of the accused—Subba Reddy—had acknowledged that adulteration had indeed taken place. Chandrababu Naidu said he took corrective steps to restore the purity of the prasadam after TTD was “defiled” by such practices. He also pointed out a clear difference between the quality of laddus distributed in the past and those being offered now, asserting that devotees themselves could notice the change.
Criticising what he termed as “political showmanship,” the Chief Minister alleged that in the name of consolatory visits, deliberate inconvenience was caused to the public, citing instances where travel to Guntur took up to six hours and other vehicles were restricted, causing hardship to commuters. He further referred to past incidents involving aggressive convoy movements and acts of intimidation, stating that such displays of strength should be limited to election campaigns, not public life. “Instead of fighting for people’s issues, they are indulging in power demonstrations for political gains,” he said, adding that he knows well how to counter such politics. ghee adulteration cleaning substances alleged Kurnool, Andhra Pradesh, India Laddu prasadam fflo:hasAdulterant adulterated ghee preparing Laddu prasadam using adulterated ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant substances allegedly used for cleaning bathrooms chemically adulterated ghee, including substances allegedly used for cleaning bathrooms adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt Processing laddus were prepared with chemically adulterated ghee5b:Tc7b,Pawan: SIT confirmed presence of animal fat Tirumala laddu ghee thehansindia.com Vijayawada: Deputy Chief Minister Pawan Kalyan on Thursday said that the Special Investigation Team (SIT) report had clearly confirmed the presence of animal fat in the ghee used for preparing Tirumala Srivari Laddu Prasadam and that it had not given a clean chit to the YSRCP at any stage.
Speaking to the media along with Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu and BJP state president P V N Madhav after a meeting at the Chief Minister’s residence in Undavalli, Pawan Kalyan said the NDDB report had been read out to them by the Chief Minister and it clearly supported the findings of the SIT.  
He said the issue was highly sensitive and concerned the faith of crores of devotees. “Those who play with God and hurt devotees’ sentiments have never survived in history. They should at least now seek forgiveness from Lord Venkateswara for the great sin they have committed,” he said.  
Pawan Kalyan questioned why his government would make such allegations for political gain when it had a full five-year mandate. He alleged that the YSRCP had even taken revenge on God and showed disrespect to Hindu traditions during its rule. Referring to past incidents, he cited the vandalism at Ramatheertham, theft at the Durga temple, and the burning of the Antarvedi chariot, alleging that the previous government had trivialised such incidents instead of taking action.  
Clarifying that the issue was not about religion, he said it was about accountability and respect for faith. “They committed a mistake, and instead of apologising, they are demanding that we apologise,” he said.  
Pawan claimed that adulterated laddus were even sent to Ayodhya, calling it a serious offence. He said multiple reports had confirmed irregularities in the ghee.  
While the NDDB detected animal fat residues, he said the NDRI had admitted it lacked the capacity for certain tests.  
Stating that devotees’ sentiments had been deeply hurt, Pawan Kalyan said the government was revealing facts responsibly and would not politicise the issue. “We will not remain silent on matters concerning God and Dharma,” he asserted. ghee Tirumala Srivari Laddu Prasadam adulteration animal fat alleged Vijayawada, Krishna, Andhra Pradesh, India Tirumala Srivari Laddu Prasadam fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat confirmed the presence of animal fat in the ghee used for preparing Tirumala Srivari Laddu Prasadam IncidentFinding: animal fat in Tirumala Laddu fflo:identifies animal fat confirmed the presence of animal fat in the ghee used for preparing Tirumala Srivari Laddu Prasadam IncidentFinding: animal fat in Tirumala Laddu fflo:foundIn Tirumala Srivari Laddu Prasadam presence of animal fat in the ghee used for preparing Tirumala Srivari Laddu Prasadam NDDB detection of animal fat fflo:identifies animal fat NDDB detected animal fat residues animal fat fflo:foundAt Processing presence of animal fat in the ghee used for preparing Tirumala Srivari Laddu Prasadam animal fat in Tirumala Laddu fflo:supportedBy NDDB report NDDB report had been read out to them by the Chief Minister and it clearly supported the findings of the SIT5c:Td0d,Pawan Kalyan, Finance Minister, Madhav Say No CBI Clean Chit in Tirumala Ghee Case deccanchronicle.com Deputy CM says laddus prepared with adulterated ghee had even been sent for consecration of the Ram Mandir in Ayodhya.
Vijayawada: Deputy Chief Minister K. Pawan Kalyan, Finance minister Payyavula Keshav and AP BJP state president P.V.N. Madhav at a joint press conference said the CBI has not given a clean chit in the Tirumala adulterated ghee laddu case. They quoted CBI as stating that the substance used for laddus is not prepared from milk fat.
Speaking to media at the Chief Minister’s camp office in Undavalli, the three leaders reiterated that the NDA coalition government will safeguard the Tirumala Temple’s sanctity, ensure rituals and prasadam are prepared strictly as per Agama Shastras, and pursue the laddu adulteration case till justice is delivered.
“Faith and tradition cannot be compromised,” they declared.
Pawan Kalyan termed the adulteration as an “attack on Hindu faith.” He said those responsible must apologise to Lord Venkateswara. “Anyone who bears hostility towards God will ultimately be ruined,” he remarked, maintaining that the coalition government will not spare the guilty.
The AP Deputy CM alleged that laddus prepared with adulterated ghee had even been sent for consecration of the Ram Mandir in Ayodhya, despite officials being aware of irregularities as early as 2022. He accused the previous YSR Congress Party government of suppressing laboratory reports.
Pawan Kalyan went on to charge that the Jagan Mohan Reddy government trivialised desecrations at 200 temples across Andhra Pradesh between 2019 and 2024.
Finance minister Payyavula Keshav said the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) report has confirmed large-scale adulteration with the ghee containing palm oil, vegetable oils, chemicals and animal fats. He maintained that of nearly 59.7 lakh kg procured during the previous regime, about 58 lakh kg had been palm oil. “This is not an allegation, but a crime committed with full knowledge and deliberately covered up,” Keshav said.
BJP state president Madhav accused the previous government of undermining temple administration and allowing irregularities even in Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams. Questioning how a dairy that did not even procure milk could supply ghee, Madhav said preparing laddus with chemicals amounted to playing with devotees’ sentiments and public health. ghee adulteration CBI investigation pending_test India, Tirumala laddu fflo:hasAdulterant adulterated ghee laddus prepared with adulterated ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil ghee containing palm oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable oils ghee containing palm oil, vegetable oils, chemicals and animal fats ghee fflo:hasAdulterant chemicals ghee containing palm oil, vegetable oils, chemicals and animal fats ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fats ghee containing palm oil, vegetable oils, chemicals and animal fats palm oil fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee ghee containing palm oil laddus fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil ghee containing palm oil ghee adulteration finding fflo:supportedBy National Dairy Development Board report NDDB report has confirmed large-scale adulteration large-scale adulteration in ghee fflo:supportedBy NDDB report NDDB report has confirmed large-scale adulteration5d:T134e,Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration case: SIT indicates tender norms were diluted, reports suppressed indianexpress.com Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration case: SIT indicates tender norms were diluted, reports suppressed
In an 11-page letter outlining its allegations, the SIT has called on the Andhra Pradesh govt to take stringent action against those responsible.
In an 11-page letter submitted to the Andhra Pradesh government regarding the alleged adulteration of ghee used to prepare the laddu prasadam at Venkateswara Temple in Tirupati, the special investigation team (SIT) probing the case has outlined serious irregularities, rule violations and alleged deliberate misconduct between 2019 and 2024.
The SIT recommended stringent action against those responsible.
It said it found that in 2020, ghee tender conditions put forward by the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD), which manages the temple, were allegedly arbitrarily relaxed without any scientific study, expert consultation or justification, despite the same norms having been strengthened in August 2019 to safeguard quality and transparency.
Under the YSRCP regime, key eligibility criteria were allegedly diluted, including a reduction of the annual turnover requirement from Rs 250 crore to Rs 150 crore, lowering mandatory dairy experience from three years to one year, removal of the requirement to procure four lakh litres of milk per day, and reduction of milk fat extraction capacity from 12 tonnes to 8 tonnes per day.
The SIT has held senior TTD officials — financial adviser and chief accounts officer O Balaji, additional executive officer A V Dharmareddy and then executive officer Anil Kumar Singhal — responsible for allegedly approving and implementing these relaxations without due application of mind and in violation of established procurement safeguards.
The TTD Purchase Committee, in which C Bhaskar Reddy and B Karunakar Reddy, who was TTD chairman, participated as special invitees, recommended these relaxations, which were approved by the TTD Board in February 2020 during the YSRCP government, as per the SIT.
As a result, ineligible private dairies with inadequate experience and procurement capacity were allowed to secure TTD ghee tenders, while established cooperative dairies were pushed out of effective competition, the SIT letter said.
Following widespread complaints, ghee samples were sent to the Central Food Technological Research Institute (CFTRI) on May 25, 2022. CFTRI confirmed adulteration in ghee supplied by Vyshnavi Dairy and Bhole Baba Dairy. Despite this laboratory confirmation, the SIT found that the reports were ignored and suppressed during the YSRCP regime, and that no action was taken against the suppliers or responsible officials, the SIT said.
The SIT concluded that the procurement of adulterated ghee compromised the quality of the laddu prasadam at the temple in Tirumala and severely hurt the sentiments and faith of crores of devotees of Lord Venkateswara. It said its investigation established that this was not an accidental lapse, but the outcome of deliberate administrative decisions, sustained negligence and misuse of authority during the previous government.
Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu’s office has issued a statement that, acting firmly on the SIT findings, the CM transferred former TTD EO Anil Kumar Singhal and initiated high-level action to ensure that all those involved are held accountable.
The current TDP government has reiterated that it is committed to a thorough, transparent and impartial investigation and to strict legal and disciplinary action against everyone responsible, irrespective of position or influence. Stringent tender norms, food safety standards and quality control mechanisms will be restored to protect the sanctity of Tirumala Srivari Prasadam and restore public trust, the statement said. ghee adulteration prohibited_additive substandard unspecified transfer_of_officials investigation lab_confirmed Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee tender conditions fflo:appliesToFood ghee ghee tender conditions put forward by the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams CFTRI ghee adulteration finding fflo:foundIn ghee CFTRI confirmed adulteration in ghee supplied by Vyshnavi Dairy and Bhole Baba Dairy laddu prasadam fflo:hasIngredient ghee ghee compromised the quality of the laddu prasadam Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration case fflo:foundIn ghee alleged adulteration of ghee used to prepare the laddu prasadam Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration case fflo:inRegion Tirupati ghee used to prepare the laddu prasadam at Venkateswara Temple in Tirupati CFTRI ghee adulteration finding fflo:identifies adulterant in ghee CFTRI confirmed adulteration in ghee supplied by Vyshnavi Dairy and Bhole Baba Dairy CFTRI ghee adulteration finding fflo:producedBy CFTRI laboratory analysis CFTRI confirmed adulteration in ghee supplied by Vyshnavi Dairy and Bhole Baba Dairy5e:Tf62,Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration: SIT flags violations, irregularities, misconduct - BusinessToday businesstoday.in A special investigation team (SIT) probing the supply of ghee used for the preparation of laddu prasadam at Venkateswara Temple in Tirupati has reported serious irregularities, rule violations, and alleged deliberate misconduct by senior officials of Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) between 2019 and 2024, stated a report.
According to a report in The Indian Express, in an 11-page letter to the Andhra Pradesh government, the SIT outlined how changes to the ghee procurement process compromised quality and accountability, resulting in adulterated ghee being served to millions of devotees. The SIT recommended stringent action against those responsible and called for reinstatement of strict procurement standards to restore public trust, it said.
As per the SIT, in 2020 the TTD Purchase Committee, which included C Bhaskar Reddy and then TTD chairman B Karunakar Reddy as special invitees, recommended relaxations to the ghee tender conditions without scientific study, expert consultation, or justification. These relaxations were approved by the TTD Board during the YSRCP government, despite tender norms having been strengthened in August 2019,the report added. As a result, ineligible private dairies were allowed to participate, undermining established cooperative dairies.
The SIT noted several changes to eligibility criteria, such as reducing the annual turnover requirement from Rs 250 crore to Rs 150 crore, lowering mandatory dairy experience from three years to one year, removing the requirement to procure four lakh litres of milk daily, and decreasing the milk fat extraction capacity from 12 to 8 tonnes per day.
Senior TTD officials – financial adviser and chief accounts officer O Balaji, additional executive officer A V Dharmareddy, and then executive officer Anil Kumar Singhal – were named by the SIT as responsible for approving and implementing these relaxations in violation of established procurement safeguards. The SIT held them accountable for decisions that enabled unqualified suppliers to secure contracts.
Following complaints about ghee quality, samples were sent to the Central Food Technological Research Institute (CFTRI) in May 2022. CFTRI confirmed adulteration in ghee supplied by Vyshnavi Dairy and Bhole Baba Dairy. Despite this, the SIT said the reports were suppressed and ignored during the YSRCP regime, and no action was taken against suppliers or responsible officials.
The SIT concluded that the procurement of adulterated ghee compromised the quality of the laddu prasadam at Tirumala Temple and hurt the sentiments and faith of devotees. The investigation established that this was not an accidental lapse, but the outcome of deliberate administrative decisions and misuse of authority during the previous government.
A statement from Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu’s office said the CM has acted on the SIT findings by transferring the former TTD executive officer Anil Kumar Singhal and initiating action to ensure accountability. ghee adulteration transfer of Anil Kumar Singhal alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India CFTRI ghee adulteration finding prov:wasAttributedTo Vyshnavi Dairy CFTRI confirmed adulteration in ghee supplied by Vyshnavi Dairy CFTRI ghee adulteration finding prov:wasAttributedTo Bhole Baba Dairy CFTRI confirmed adulteration in ghee supplied by Vyshnavi Dairy and Bhole Baba Dairy ghee procurement relaxation prov:wasAssociatedWith TTD Board relaxations were approved by the TTD Board ghee adulteration finding fflo:confirmedBy CFTRI analysis result CFTRI confirmed adulteration in ghee supplied by Vyshnavi Dairy and Bhole Baba Dairy ghee adulteration finding fflo:triggeredAction transfer of Anil Kumar Singhal CM has acted on the SIT findings by transferring the former TTD executive officer Anil Kumar Singhal5f:Tbc5,Adulterated Ghee Was Supplied to Srisailam Temple Along With Tirumala Devasthanam: SIT deccanchronicle.com Adulterated Ghee Was Supplied to Srisailam Temple Along With Tirumala Devasthanam: SIT
From May 2022 to March 2023, adulterated ghee was delivered to Srisailam by Rajesh Corporation, which procured ghee from Bhole Baba Dairy, that supplied adulterated ghee to the Tirumala temple
The Special Investigation Team (SIT) report identified that adulterated ghee was supplied to the Srisailam temple, along with the Tirumala temple, during the YSRC rule in Andhra Pradesh. Ghee supplied by the contractors is used in making laddus sold as prasadam to the devotees.
From May 2022 to March 2023, adulterated ghee was delivered to Srisailam by Rajesh Corporation, which procured ghee from Bhole Baba Dairy, that supplied adulterated ghee to the Tirumala temple. The Srisailam temple, which usually buys ghee from the Vijaya Dairy, had bought 3,25,064 kg ghee from the Rajesh Corporation and paid Rs 15.89 crore.
SIT sleuths said that the ghee supplied by Bhole Baba Dairy is not ghee but a mixture of vegetable oils and some chemicals.
In the past, the Srisailam Temple Trust Board had taken a decision to purchase ghee from dairies run by the Srisailam Devasthanam Milk Societies. Accordingly, only those dairies operated by the Societies used to file tenders. As the Vijaya Dairy in Nandyal used to supply ghee at a cheaper price, the Temple Board used to give the ghee contract to the same organization.
During the YSRC rule in 2022, the Devasthanam officials and Vijaya Dairy representatives had a conflict over the pricing. When the Temple Board asked the Vijaya Dairy to reduce the price further, the contractor made it clear that it cannot be done.
Taking advantage of the situation, Rajesh Corporation offered to supply ghee at Rs 489 a kg and the tender was awarded to the organisation. There were allegations that Vijaya Dairy was removed as the supplier, according to a pre-meditated plan.
Vijaya Dairy began supplying ghee to the Srisailam temple as usual from April 2023.
On an average, over 1 lakh laddus are sold at the Srisailam Devasthanam. ghee adulteration vegetable oils chemicals alleged Srisailam, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable oils ghee supplied by Bhole Baba Dairy is not ghee but a mixture of vegetable oils ghee fflo:hasAdulterant chemicals the ghee supplied by Bhole Baba Dairy is not ghee but a mixture of vegetable oils and some chemicals Adulteration of ghee supplied to Tirumala Temple prov:used ghee supplied adulterated ghee to the Tirumala temple ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod Substitution with vegetable oils and chemicals is not ghee but a mixture of vegetable oils and some chemicals Adulteration of ghee supplied to Srisailam Temple prov:wasAssociatedWith Rajesh Corporation adulterated ghee was delivered to Srisailam by Rajesh Corporation Adulteration of ghee supplied to Srisailam Temple prov:used ghee adulterated ghee was delivered to Srisailam60:T5bb,Pawan Kalyan Meets Naidu to Discuss Political and Tirumala Ghee Issue thehansindia.com Deputy Chief Minister Pawan Kalyan met with Chief Minister Chandrababu Naidu this morning to discuss various political developments and other pressing matters. The meeting, which began shortly after Pawan Kalyan arrived at Naidu’s residence, focused on opposition tactics, the upcoming Rajya Sabha elections, appointment processes, alliance coordination, and efforts to counter YSRCP propaganda.
Additionally, the leaders addressed the controversy over adulterated ghee in Tirumala Srivari Laddu prasad. Given Tirumala’s global devotee base, the government is emphasising measures to safeguard their sentiments. Following a report from the NDDB, the Chief Minister had previously ordered an inquiry, which led to the formation of a SIT under the CBI after several individuals approached the Supreme Court. The SIT’s report, submitted to the cabinet, confirmed adulteration of the ghee. Discussions during Tuesday’s cabinet meeting focused on identifying those responsible and holding all facilitators accountable. ghee adulteration unknown SIT formation inquiry alleged Tirumala, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India Tirumala Srivari Laddu fflo:hasAdulterant ghee controversy over adulterated ghee in Tirumala Srivari Laddu prasad ghee fflo:hasAdulterant unknown adulterant confirmed adulteration of the ghee SIT investigation fflo:issuedBy CBI formation of a SIT under the CBI61:T1815,Andhra to form panel to identify ‘real culprits’ of Tirumala ghee adulteration hindustantimes.com Andhra to form panel to identify ‘real culprits’ of Tirumala ghee adulteration
Andhra Pradesh's cabinet will form an inquiry committee to investigate ghee adulteration for Tirumala laddu, ensuring fairness and accountability.
The Andhra Pradesh cabinet meeting chaired by chief minister N Chandrababu Naidu on Tuesday decided to constitute a high-level inquiry committee to identify the “real culprits” behind the adulteration of ghee supplied to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) for the preparation of famed Tirumala laddu prasadam.
Disclosing this to reporters after the cabinet meeting, state finance minister Payyavula Keshav said the inquiry committee would probe the role of officials and non-officials responsible for the ghee adulteration and examine whether there were any additional administrative lapses, apart from those pointed out by the Central Bureau of Investigation-led special investigation team (SIT) in its final charge sheet submitted to the court.
“The government’s approach is not driven by vengeance but by fairness and due process. We shall give all the people concerned an opportunity to present their version before the committee,” he said.
However, Keshav said officials who admitted that the lapses occurred knowingly, including those who signed files again, would be considered partners in the offence, not merely as part of an administrative lapse.
The advocate general had also been consulted on why this angle was not examined earlier, he said.
“The SIT report had clearly recommended action against all concerned officials – right from senior figures such as former TTD chairman Y V Subba Reddy, former additional executive officer AV Dharma Reddy, chief finance officer O Balaji and former executive officer AK Singhal to members of lower-level committees,” he said.
The finance minister said the committee would be set up immediately and it would be asked to submit the report in a short time.
Keshav said the cabinet had held an extensive discussion on the Tirumala ghee adulteration issue, setting aside the day’s regular agenda to focus exclusively on the matter.
The cabinet thoroughly examined a 11-page confidential report submitted by the CBI-led SIT to the government and the charge sheet filed in the court.
The cabinet observed that the SIT report had identified major lapses in the ghee procurement process, including dilution of tender conditions, quality control failures, submission of forged documents and large scale irregularities in supply chains.
The minister said initial findings from the NDDB–CALF laboratory revealed possible presence of multiple suspected adulterants in the ghee samples, including soybean oil, sunflower oil, rapeseed oil, cottonseed oil, fish oil, beef tallow and lard.
“These revelations, he noted, were the basis on which the chief minister had raised the issue publicly earlier. The SIT report also noted that warnings issued by the CFTRI laboratory in 2022 were allegedly ignored, and that adulterated ghee supply may have occurred to the extent of nearly 58 lakh litres, raising serious concerns,” he said.
The cabinet decided that both legal and administrative action must be initiated against those found guilty. It also resolved to introduce institutional reforms and strengthen quality control systems to prevent such incidents in the future.
State health minister Satya Kumar Yadav claimed that chemicals were used to manufacture ghee without milk, calling it an act “against nature,” and said the cabinet unanimously agreed that no offender, regardless of stature, should be spared.
YSR Congress Party took strong exception to the state cabinet’s decision to constitute yet another inquiry committee, only to carry out the vengeance politics of the chief minister.
In a statement, YSRCP parliament member from Tirupati Maddila Gurumoorthy said the CBI-led SIT constituted by the Supreme Court categorically concluded that no animal fat was used in the Tirupati laddu.
“The TDP leadership is unable to accept this finding as it went against its false allegations. So, it is pushing for another inquiry committee on the pretext that a report had not come as per its expectations,” he said.
The Lok Sabha MP alleged that this move was part of the so-called “Red Book” politics and questioned what the TDP hoped to achieve by repeatedly reopening a settled matter.
- Srinivasa Rao is Senior Assistant Editor based out of Hyderabad covering developments in Andhra Pradesh and Telangana . He has over three decades of reporting experience. ghee adulteration soybean oil chemicals inquiry committee formation alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant soybean oil possible presence of multiple suspected adulterants in the ghee samples, including soybean oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant chemicals chemicals were used to manufacture ghee without milk ghee fflo:hasAdulterant unspecified adulterant ghee adulteration for Tirumala laddu inquiry committee formation fflo:issuedBy Andhra Pradesh cabinet Andhra Pradesh's cabinet will form an inquiry committee Tirumala ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Y V Subba Reddy former TTD chairman Y V Subba Reddy Tirumala ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith AV Dharma Reddy former additional executive officer AV Dharma Reddy Tirumala ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith O Balaji chief finance officer O Balaji Tirumala ghee adulteration fflo:foundAtStep ghee procurement process lapses in the ghee procurement process ghee fflo:hasAdulterant sunflower oil including soybean oil, sunflower oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant rapeseed oil sunflower oil, rapeseed oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant cottonseed oil rapeseed oil, cottonseed oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant fish oil cottonseed oil, fish oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant beef tallow fish oil, beef tallow ghee fflo:hasAdulterant lard beef tallow and lard Ghee adulteration finding fflo:identifies soybean oil findings from the NDDB–CALF laboratory revealed possible presence of multiple suspected adulterants62:T11d5,SIT finds ‘serious irregularities, deliberate misconduct’ in TTD adulterated ghee case thehindu.com The Special Investigation Team (SIT) constituted by the Supreme Court has submitted a report to the Andhra Pradesh government on the alleged use of adulterated ghee in the preparation of the sacred Tirumala ‘Srivari laddu prasadam’.
The 11-page report outlines serious irregularities, rule violations, and alleged deliberate misconduct that had taken place between 2019 and 2024, and recommends stringent action against those responsible.
The SIT, in its Self-Contained Note (SCN), has specifically highlighted the role of the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) Purchase Committee in the alleged adulterated ghee episode.
The names of Chevireddy Bhaskar Reddy (then MLA), Bhumana Karunakar Reddy (special invitee), and senior TTD officials Anil Kumar Singhal (then Executive Officer), A.V. Dharma Reddy (then Additional Executive Officer), and O. Balaji (then FA&CAO) find mention in the report.
The SIT has recommended that the government take suitable action as deemed fit against the erring committee members and senior TTD officials for “deliberate omissions and failures in both relaxation and enforcement of tender conditions.”
According to the SIT, violations had occurred at every stage of the process — from modification of tender conditions to procurement and supply of ghee, raising serious questions about oversight and accountability within the committee.
The SIT has also pointed out that major changes had been made to the tender conditions in 2020, allegedly without any scientific study or due diligence, enabling ineligible companies to participate in the bidding process.
Between 2020 and 2023, such unqualified firms had allegedly supplied adulterated ghee for laddu preparation. The role of Mr. Balaji was also pointed out in the issue.
The report points out that eligibility norms were significantly diluted, including a reduction of minimum turnover requirement from ₹250 crore to ₹150 crore, lowering mandatory dairy industry experience from three years to one year, removal of daily milk procurement norms, and a reduction in butter extraction requirements.
The SIT has specifically mentioned the role of the TTD Purchase Committee, noting that special invitees had played a key role in the tendering and procurement process, during which multiple violations occurred. Senior TTD officials were held responsible for allowing procurement from ineligible dairies, thereby hurting the religious sentiments of the devotees.
Amid mounting complaints, ghee samples were sent to the Central Food Technological Research Institute (CFTRI) on May 25, 2022. Tests reportedly had confirmed adulteration in ghee supplied by two dairies.
However, the SIT has noted that the findings were allegedly ignored by senior officials. Even after FSSAI mandated stricter standards in 2021, senior TTD officials had reportedly exempted certain private dairies from these specific quality agreements without recorded justification.
The SIT has said that the “hurried” and “unjustified” relaxation of tender conditions compromised the quality of the ghee used for the sacred Tirumala laddu. This negligence has led to the procurement of adulterated ingredients, ultimately hurting the religious sentiments of millions of devotees worldwide.
The report concludes that repeated lapses and coordinated failures at multiple levels enabled the continued supply of adulterated ghee, calling for strict legal and administrative action.
Published - February 04, 2026 09:34 am IST ghee adulteration mislabeling prohibited_additive adulterated ghee report submission alleged Tirumala, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India stricter standards lkif:created_by FSSAI FSSAI mandated stricter standards in 2021 continued supply of adulterated ghee fflo:carriedBy ghee continued supply of adulterated ghee TTD ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Anil Kumar Singhal senior TTD officials Anil Kumar Singhal (then Executive Officer) TTD ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith TTD Purchase Committee highlighted the role of the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) Purchase Committee in the alleged adulterated ghee episode ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith TTD Purchase Committee The SIT has specifically mentioned the role of the TTD Purchase Committee ghee adulteration act prov:used ghee supplied adulterated ghee for laddu preparation ghee adulteration finding fflo:foundIn ghee confirmed adulteration in ghee supplied by two dairies63:Tb3a,Andhra Pradesh Cabinet hands over TTD ghee adulteration case to Commission of Enquiry thehindu.com The Andhra Pradesh Cabinet has decided to entrust the alleged case of adulteration of ghee supplied to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams to a Commission of Enquiry to identify the actual masterminds behind the controversy.
The Cabinet meeting, chaired by Chief Minister N. Chandrababu Naidu on Tuesday, discussed the issue in detail. The Cabinet examined the report submitted by the Special Investigation Team, during which several shortcomings in the findings were flagged. It was subsequently resolved that the Commission of Enquiry would address the gaps in the SIT report and conduct a comprehensive probe into the procurement process, tender conditions and administrative lapses linked to the alleged mixing of chemical substances in the ghee.
During the meeting, Ministers informed the Chief Minister that former TTD chairman Bhumana Karunakar Reddy, who was not a member of the purchase committee at the time, was reportedly invited as a special invitee, while committee members including then Minister Kolusu Parthasarathi and Vemireddy Prashanthi Reddy were not invited.
Officials also informed the Cabinet that laddus allegedly prepared using adulterated ghee were even sent to Ayodhya. The Cabinet discussed changes made to tender conditions and questioned why the then Executive Officer, Anil Kumar Singhal, did not raise objections despite modifications to procurement norms. Ministers also raised concerns that tenders were allegedly secured using fake documents. It was pointed out that a CFTRI report in 2022 had indicated ghee adulteration, but the findings were allegedly ignored by officials at the time.
Deputy Chief Minister K. Pawan Kalyan sought clarification on whether the role of former TTD chairman Y. V. Subba Reddy was mentioned in the SIT report and whether the charge sheet explicitly referred to animal fat. Officials confirmed that the charge sheet clearly mentioned animal fat on page 35, sources said.
The Cabinet directed the Commission of Enquiry to submit its report at the earliest. It also asked the panel to focus on procedural flaws in the tender process and examine allegations that cooperative dairies were deliberately sidelined to allow bogus dairies to enter the supply chain.
Published - February 03, 2026 08:27 pm IST ghee adulteration chemical substances entrust to Commission of Enquiry alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant chemical substances alleged mixing of chemical substances in the ghee laddus fkg:hasIngredient ghee laddus allegedly prepared using adulterated ghee ghee adulteration finding fflo:supportedBy CFTRI report in 2022 CFTRI report in 2022 had indicated ghee adulteration ghee adulteration finding fflo:foundIn ghee CFTRI report in 2022 had indicated ghee adulteration64:T10b4,Andhra Pradesh govt. vows strict action over adulterated ghee in TTD prasadam thehindu.com The State government has pledged decisive action following revelations that adulterated ghee was used in Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams prasadam, describing the episode as a grave breach of public trust and temple sanctity.
Addressing a press conference at the Secretariat on Tuesday, Finance Minister Pyyavula Keshav said the government was treating the issue with utmost seriousness. “Protecting the sanctity of TTD is our foremost duty. The faith, devotion and purity of devotees must remain intact,” he said. He announced that a short-term administrative committee has been constituted to examine the Special Investigation Team report submitted under CBI supervision, and that a detailed report will be placed before the government within a stipulated timeframe.
Explaining the Cabinet’s deliberations, Mr. Keshav said the SIT report pointed to serious irregularities in the TTD procurement process since 2019. These included dilution of tender norms, submission of false documents and major lapses in quality control. Laboratory tests conducted by NDDB CALF detected possible adulterants such as soybean, sunflower, rapeseed, cottonseed, fish oil and lard. The report also noted deliberate lowering of eligibility criteria and the participation of unqualified suppliers, resulting in the supply of substandard ghee. Former Executive Officers A. V. Dharma Reddy and Anil Kumar Simhal, and former F&CAO O. Balaji, were identified as accountable for the lapses. The Cabinet resolved to initiate stringent legal and administrative action against those responsible, strengthen quality control systems and implement institutional reforms to prevent recurrence.
Health and Family Welfare Minister Satyakumar Yadav criticised previous administrations for ignoring warnings from the Central Food Technology Research Institute and relaxing tender conditions, which he said enabled the use of harmful substances in ghee production. Ghee was produced without real milk, undermining the faith of devotees and the sacred traditions of the temple, he said, describing the episode as part of a ₹250 crore scam that damaged the shrine’s reputation.
Information and Public Relations Minister Kolusu Parthasarathi said the government’s priority remained the protection of devotees’ faith and the sanctity of TTD. Civil Supplies Minister Nadendla Manohar said the issue would not be politicised and that all corrective steps would be taken in a transparent manner. Deputy Chief Minister Pawan Kalyan and other Ministers also stressed the need for swift accountability and systemic reforms.
The Cabinet unanimously adopted a zero-tolerance approach to malpractice, committing itself to strict action, institutional reforms and transparent communication with the public. Chief Minister N. Chandrababu Naidu reiterated that safeguarding the faith of millions of devotees and preserving the sacredness of Tirumala was the government’s highest priority.
Published - February 03, 2026 08:12 pm IST ghee adulteration harmful substances strict action legal action administrative action alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod production without real milk Ghee was produced without real milk ghee fflo:hasAdulterant harmful substances enabled the use of harmful substances in ghee production ghee fflo:hasAdulterant soybean detected possible adulterants such as soybean ghee fflo:hasAdulterant sunflower oil detected possible adulterants such as soybean, sunflower, rapeseed, cottonseed, fish oil and lard ghee fflo:hasAdulterant rapeseed detected possible adulterants such as soybean, sunflower, rapeseed ghee fflo:hasAdulterant cottonseed detected possible adulterants such as soybean, sunflower, rapeseed, cottonseed ghee fflo:hasAdulterant fish oil detected possible adulterants such as soybean, sunflower, rapeseed, cottonseed, fish oil and lard ghee fflo:hasAdulterant lard detected possible adulterants such as soybean, sunflower, rapeseed, cottonseed, fish oil and lard ghee fflo:hasAdulterant soybean detected possible adulterants such as soybean production without real milk fflo:hasFraudType Substitution Ghee was produced without real milk65:T980,Andhra govt transfers TTD official after charge sheet in ghee case siasat.com Amaravati: A week after the SIT filed its charge sheet in a Tirupati court over adulterated ghee allegations during the previous YSRCP regime, TTD Executive Officer Anil Kumar Singhal was transferred.
The 1993 batch IAS officer who served as EO between May 2017 and October 2020 during YS Jagan Mohan Reddy’ government, was asked to report to the General Administration Department for further posting.
A Government Order issued on Sunday said Kumar was replaced by Muddada Ravichandra as the EO.
The SIT in its chargesheet said investigation revealed that during April 2019, a Committee was constituted with the approval of then EO, Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams with the TTD Officials and external Dairy Experts to revise/add certain conditions in the ghee tenders.
The TTD Board in Resolution no. 371 on February 29, 2020 approved the above recommendation of the Purchase Committee and accordingly, the relaxations of ghee tender conditions were enforced.
The Investigation revealed that due to the relaxation in Ghee tender conditions, no cooperative dairy got the tender in its favor but only to private dairies.
Further, the relaxations of certain conditions paved the way for participation of dairies without procuring milk and newly established dairies without having required experience and reputation and ultimately compromised the quality of ghee procured by TTD for the preparation of Laddu Prasadams, the SIT said.
Andhra Pradesh Finance Minister Payyavula Keshav on Saturday said that the ghee samples from TTD sent to the NDDB clearly stated that there was a possibility of the presence of animal fats, and that Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu had quoted the same report.
Evidence before the SIT shows that adulteration began only after 2019, alleged Keshav. ghee adulteration animal fats charge sheet filed official transferred alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fats ghee samples from TTD sent to the NDDB clearly stated that there was a possibility of the presence of animal fats ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fats ghee samples from TTD sent to the NDDB clearly stated that there was a possibility of the presence of animal fats animal fats fflo:detectedBy NDDB analysis ghee samples from TTD sent to the NDDB clearly stated that there was a possibility of the presence of animal fats66:T11e1,'Made from synthetic material': CBI chargesheet rules out mixing of animal fats in Tirupati laddu ghee | Hyderabad News - The Times of India indiatimes.com HYDERABAD: The special investigation team of the CBI, in its chargesheet filed in Nellore ACB court, has not made any reference to the ghee supplied to the 
Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) as being adulterated with animal fats. 
It, however, said the laboratory tests of the ghee samples revealed that synthetic ghee was supplied for making laddu prasadam. It was not cow ghee at all, but ghee made from synthetic material blended with vegetable oils, it said.
Immediately after coming to power, TDP supremo and chief minister 
N Chandrababu Naidu had in Sept 2024 alleged that ghee adulterated with animal fats had been used to make the laddu prasadam during the previous YSRC govtâs tenure (2019 to 2024). The SIT was formed to investigate the allegations that ghee mixed with tallow and lard was supplied to TTD.
The CBI investigation found that the samples drawn from tankers supplied by AR Dairy in July 2024 were not cow ghee samples, but samples of synthetic ghee. 
It also described the ghee supplied by Bhole Baba dairy and its proxies as âfake gheeâ.
The TDP, following Naiduâs allegation, had released a copy of the lab report from the National Dairy Development Boardâs Centre for Analysis & Learning in Livestock & Food (NDDB-CALF) that made reference, though with conditions, that the samples were adulterated with animal fats.
According to the chargesheet, the CBI asked NDDB to carry out a fresh round of raw data analysis and further testing of the remaining ghee samples drawn by TTD from four tankers of AR Dairy (on July 6 and 12, 2024) to obtain a conclusive opinion on adulterants used by the dairy.
NDDB conducted the tests and submitted its report on March 27 last year. The chargesheet contains the key findings of the latest lab report. It states the presence of butyric acid was below the limit of quantification in all four samples, suggesting that the content of milk fat was very low.
It also noted that the presence of lauric acid and myristic acid despite very low milk fat content, suggested that there was a presence of coconut oil and/or palm kernel oil. Fatty acid analysis showed the use of palm oil and/or palm stearin. It also said chances of the presence of fish oil in the ghee samples appeared very rare.
The lab report, as presented in the chargesheet, showed that the milk fat was fake. In two samples there was no cholesterol, concluding that they were made of vegetable oils. The report further stated that the absence of cholesterol suggested that chances of the presence of tallow, lard, and fish oil were âvery lowâ.
Based on the fatty acid profile and presence of beta sitosterol in ghee samples, it was concluded that these samples were primarily a mixture of palm oil and/or palm stearin with palm kernel oil, the chargesheet stated. ghee adulteration substitution synthetic ghee beta sitosterol chargesheet_filed alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India synthetic ghee fflo:isSubstituteFor cow ghee It was not cow ghee at all, but ghee made from synthetic material laddu prasadam fflo:hasAdulterant synthetic ghee synthetic ghee was supplied for making laddu prasadam ghee fflo:hasAdulterant beta sitosterol presence of beta sitosterol in ghee samples Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith AR Dairy samples drawn from tankers supplied by AR Dairy blending with vegetable oils fflo:hasFraudType Substitution It was not cow ghee at all, but ghee made from synthetic material synthetic ghee fflo:foundAt Distribution samples drawn from tankers supplied by AR Dairy synthetic ghee fflo:foundAt Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams ghee supplied to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams analysis of ghee samples fso:isPerformedAt NDDB-CALF lab report from the National Dairy Development Boardâs Centre for Analysis & Learning in Livestock & Food (NDDB-CALF) CBI prov:wasAssociatedWith fresh round of raw data analysis CBI asked NDDB to carry out a fresh round of raw data analysis ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil Fatty acid analysis showed the use of palm oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm stearin Fatty acid analysis showed the use of palm oil and/or palm stearin ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil samples were primarily a mixture of palm oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm stearin mixture of palm oil and/or palm stearin ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm kernel oil with palm kernel oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable oils made of vegetable oils67:T1c1c,TTD chief rejects YSRCP’s ‘clean chit’ claim in laddu ghee scam siasat.com Tirupati: In a scathing attack on the YSRCP, TTD Chairman B R Naidu on Friday alleged that a ‘massive ghee adulteration scam’ involving harmful chemicals had taken place during the YS Jagan Mohan Reddy-led government in the preparation of laddu prasadam in the famous Tirumala temple.
He also termed this alleged adulteration as an “insult to Hindus”.
According to BR Naidu, nearly 60 lakh kilograms of adulterated ghee, valued at approximately Rs 250 crore, was supplied to TTD during the previous government.
CBI found sacrilege, loot: TTD chairman
Addressing a press conference in Tirupati, the TTD chairman said the CBI-led SIT chargesheet, which was filed in the Nellore ACB Court recently, nails the alleged sacrilege, loot and betrayal of crores of devotees.
“Massive ghee adulteration scam with harmful chemicals in Srivari laddu during YSRCP rule an insult to Hindus. SIT chargesheet nails sacrilege, loot of TTD and betrayal of crores of devotees,” said BR Naidu.
Calling the alleged “ghee adulteration a huge commission-based scam”, he accused the previous government of awarding tenders to companies with no cattle and milk production facilities to supply ghee.
YSRCP regime manipulated ghee tenders: TTD chief
According to the TTD chairman, the previous YSRCP regime had manipulated ghee procurement tenders, altered eligibility conditions and awarded contracts to ineligible and incapable firms.
“Companies with no cattle, no production facilities, and no capacity to manufacture pure ghee were handed tenders purely for commissions,” he alleged.
“Tests conducted by the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) confirmed the presence of animal fat in the ghee supplied during the YSRCP tenure,” said BR Naidu.
Using this allegedly adulterated ghee, he said 20 crore laddus were prepared, amounting to one of the most shocking acts of “sacrilege” in the history of Tirumala.
“This was not negligence. This was a commission-driven scam that directly assaulted the faith of crores of Hindu devotees,” he asserted.
Chemicals found in aduletareted ghee highly dangerous: TTD chief
Expressing serious concern, the chairman warned that certain chemicals found in the adulterated ghee were highly dangerous, posing risks to public health, and underscored that claiming ghee production capabilities without owning even a single cow is outright fraud.
Holding the YSRCP leadership and YS Jagan Mohan Reddy directly responsible, BR Naidu alleged that the systematic plunder of TTD over the last five years, alluding to YSRCP regime, reflects “deep contempt for Hindu temples and traditions”.
“Hindu Gods, temples, and sentiments were repeatedly insulted during this period. Those responsible must unconditionally apologise to the Hindu community,” he demanded.
On YSRCP’s ‘chean chit’ claim
Rejecting alleged propaganda around so-called ‘clean chit’ by YSRCP leaders to the previous government in the wake of the CBI-led SIT filing its final chargesheet, the chairman insisted that micro-DNA testing is essential to establish the complete truth in the laddu ghee adulteration case.
He also urged the SIT to conduct a thorough investigation into alleged multi-crore bank transactions and identify benami accounts to expose the real beneficiaries behind the scam.
“This massive scandal surfaced only after the present coalition government assumed office. There will be zero compromise in protecting the sanctity of Tirumala and the purity of Srivari laddu,” BR Naidu affirmed.
Recently, the SIT had filed the final chargesheet in Nellore ACB Court, naming 36 people as accused, including nine TTD officials, five dairy experts and others in the ghee adulteration case.
The chargesheet noted that dairy experts had allegedly colluded with the ghee manufacturers and observed that the original material which was sold to the temple body as ghee was not at all ghee but chemically processed palmolein oil and other ingredients.
CM Naidu’s allegations
Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu had claimed in September 2024 that animal fat was used in preparing Tirupati laddus during the previous regime in the state, triggering a massive political row.
During an NDA legislative party meeting in the state in 2024, Naidu had alleged that the previous YSRCP government did not even spare Sri Venkateswara temple and used substandard ingredients and animal fats for making laddus, which are revered and sought after by crores of devotees. ghee adulteration Tests conducted by the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) confirmed the presence of animal fat in the ghee supplied during the YSRCP tenure micro-DNA testing is essential to establish the complete truth in the laddu ghee adulteration case pending_test India, Tirumala temple animal fat fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee presence of animal fat in the ghee supplied ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat Tests conducted by the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) confirmed the presence of animal fat in the ghee animal fat fflo:detectedBy NDDB tests Tests conducted by the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) confirmed the presence of animal fat in the ghee supplied during the YSRCP tenure ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat presence of animal fat in the ghee supplied ghee fflo:hasAdulterant chemicals certain chemicals found in the adulterated ghee chemicals fflo:causesEffect public health risks chemicals found in the adulterated ghee were highly dangerous, posing risks to public health laddu fkg:hasIngredient ghee Using this allegedly adulterated ghee, he said 20 crore laddus were prepared palmolein oil fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee sold to the temple body as ghee was not at all ghee but chemically processed palmolein oil Tirupati laddu fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat animal fat was used in preparing Tirupati laddus laddu prasadam fkg:hasIngredient ghee preparation of laddu prasadam in the famous Tirumala temple ghee tender manipulation prov:used ghee manipulated ghee procurement tenders Srivari laddu fflo:hasAdulterant palmolein oil original material which was sold to the temple body as ghee was not at all ghee but chemically processed palmolein oil Srivari laddu fflo:hasAdulterant chemically processed palmolein oil not at all ghee but chemically processed palmolein oil ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith dairy experts dairy experts had allegedly colluded with the ghee manufacturers ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith ghee manufacturers dairy experts had allegedly colluded with the ghee manufacturers palmolein oil fflo:detectedBy micro-DNA testing micro-DNA testing is essential to establish the complete truth in the laddu ghee adulteration case ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith TTD officials naming 36 people as accused, including nine TTD officials ghee adulteration fflo:hasFraudType Substitution original material which was sold to the temple body as ghee was not at all ghee but chemically processed palmolein oil Tirupati laddu fflo:hasAdulterationMethod use of substandard ingredients and animal fats used substandard ingredients and animal fats for making laddus68:T1cba,TTD chief says ‘real culprits’ ignored in SIT charge sheet on ghee row hindustantimes.com TTD chief says ‘real culprits’ ignored in SIT charge sheet on ghee row
TTD chairman BR Naidu criticized the CBI's SIT for not identifying key players in the ₹250 crore ghee adulteration scandal involving Tirupati laddus.
Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) trust board chairman BR Naidu said on Friday that the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI)-led special investigation team that conducted inquiry into the reported use of adulterated ghee in the preparation of famed Tirupati laddus has conveniently ignored the role of real players behind the ₹250 crore scam.
Speaking to reporters in Tirumala, Naidu said the SIT, which submitted its final charge sheet to the court last week failed to comprehensively establish the truth behind the controversy surrounding the laddu preparation process.
“A lot of questions still remain unanswered with regard to the ghee adulteration case. The TTD board shall request the CBI-led SIT to conduct further inquiry, unearth the role of racketeers behind the whole scam and file another supplementary charge sheet so that the real culprits are thrown behind the bars,” the TTD chairman said.
Naidu said the board would request the SIT to use the micro-DNA testing as part of the investigation to scientifically determine the nature of substances used in the making of Tirupati laddu during the previous regime.
He pointed out that the initial tests conducted by the National Dairy Development Board’s Centre for Analysis and Learning in Livestock and Food (NDDB CALF) in Anand, Gujarat, indicated the presence of animal fat in the ghee used in the laddu preparation.
“Based on the report, chief minister N Chandrababu Naidu, deputy CM Pawan Kalyan and various Hindu groups wanted a thorough probe. Now, the YSR Congress Party leaders are claiming that the CBI-led SIT report has ruled out the presence of animal fat and are celebrating as if the agency has given a clean chit to the previous regime. But nowhere in the report did the SIT say that there was no animal fat in the ghee,” Naidu said.
The TTD chairman questioned how nearly 6 million kilograms of ghee could have been procured without sufficient supplies of milk or butter. He alleged that adulterated ghee mixed with certain chemicals was used to manufacture approximately 200 million laddus, which were then distributed to devotees.
Calling it a “grave sin,” he said the sanctity of the sacred offering had been compromised. He further alleged that life-threatening chemicals were used during the laddu-making process, putting the health and lives of devotees at risk.
Tender rules changed to benefit fake firms
In the charge sheet, the SIT said in April 2019, the TTD had constituted a committee of experts and officials, which recommended stringent conditions to call for tenders for procurement of cow ghee used for the preparation of laddus. The conditions include cow milk fat of 12 tonnes per day, firms supplying cow ghee should have annual turnover of ₹250 crore and mandatory procurement of four lakh litres per day.
“These conditions were changed in December 2019, after the change of regime and the procurement conditions were relaxed. The condition for supply of four lakh litres per day was removed, operation of dairy was reduced from three years to one year; cow milk fat per day reduced from 12 tonnes to eight tonnes and annual turnover rule was reduced from ₹250 crore to ₹150 crore,” the SIT report said, adding this relaxation resulted in allowing selected companies participating in the tenders.
“The SIT should investigate who the people behind this change of tender conditions were and why they had allowed such large-scale financial transactions,” the TTD chairman said.
He alleged that the ghee supply contracts could not have been given to dubious firms without the support of then TTD chairman Y V Subba Reddy and former chief minister YS Jagan Mohan Reddy.
The SIT also highlighted the role of Kaduru Chinna Appanna, who served as personal assistant to Subba Reddy. During the arrest of Appanna, the SIT had revealed that he was earning only about ₹65 lakh in salary between 2019–24, but deposits of nearly ₹4.69 crore entered his bank account and significant property purchases were made in multiple districts.
The TTD chairman wanted a thorough investigation into the corrupt practices of one of the accused. “Is it possible for a private individual to handle crores of rupees in dealings through ghee supply without political backing?” he asked.
Affirming that the lab reports had categorically stated that there was no animal fat in the Tirupati laddu, YSRCP has demanded that Chandrababu’s remark on the issue, which evoked global outrage among devotees, should be taken seriously, and that he should be pulled up for his irresponsible statement.
Speaking to the media on Friday, party state coordinator Sajjala Ramakrishna Reddy said that Chandrababu, holding high office, tried to politicise the issue by passing an irresponsible remark that there was adulteration in the Tirupati laddu, which created a major flutter.
Meanwhile, the YSRCP demanded an unconditional apology from chief minister N Chandrababu Naidu for making false statements on the adulteration of laddu with animal fat, in the wake of the SIT charge sheet which quoted lab reports stating that no animal fat was found in the laddus.
YSRCP state coordinator Sajjala Ramakrishna Reddy said nowhere in the report did the SIT mention that the former TTD chairman or board members were involved in the irregularities. “This keeps our slate clean, and the allegations are subject to legal scrutiny,” he said.
- Srinivasa Rao is Senior Assistant Editor based out of Hyderabad covering developments in Andhra Pradesh and Telangana . He has over three decades of reporting experience. ghee adulteration animal fat chemicals life-threatening chemicals charge sheet alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India Tirupati laddus fkg:hasIngredient ghee use of adulterated ghee in the preparation of famed Tirupati laddus ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat presence of animal fat in the ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant chemicals adulterated ghee mixed with certain chemicals animal fat fflo:detectedBy micro-DNA testing use the micro-DNA testing as part of the investigation to scientifically determine the nature of substances used in the making of Tirupati laddu during the previous regime. He pointed out that the initial tests conducted by the National Dairy Development Board’s Centre for Analysis and Learning in Livestock and Food (NDDB CALF) in Anand, Gujarat, indicated the presence of animal fat in the ghee used in the laddu preparation. laddu fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat presence of animal fat in the ghee used in the laddu preparation laddu fflo:hasAdulterant life-threatening chemicals life-threatening chemicals were used during the laddu-making process Tirupati laddu fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat indicated the presence of animal fat in the ghee Tirupati laddu fflo:hasAdulterant chemicals adulterated ghee mixed with certain chemicals was used to manufacture approximately 200 million laddus Tirupati laddu fflo:hasIngredient cow ghee procurement of cow ghee used for the preparation of laddus69:T1593,YSRC Suppressed Ghee Adulteration Report, Now Politicising It: Kesav deccanchronicle.com Addressing the media here, Kesav said the Central Food Technological Research Institute (CFTRI) had confirmed adulteration in its 2022 report, but the then YSRC government failed to act and buried the findings.
Vijayawada: Finance minister Payyavula Kesav on Saturday accused the previous YSRC government of suppressing a 2022 report on adulterated ghee used in the Tirupati laddu and attempting to politicise the issue through what he termed a false campaign.
Addressing the media here, Kesav said the Central Food Technological Research Institute (CFTRI) had confirmed adulteration in its 2022 report, but the then YSRC government failed to act and buried the findings.
“This is not an issue for political mileage. It concerns the faith of millions of devotees. The Telugu Desam has never politicised the affairs of Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams,” the minister said.
The issue resurfaced after the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB), in its July 2024 reports, detected residues of vegetable and animal fat in ghee supplied to TTD. Based on these findings, a Special Investigation Team filed a charge sheet.
Kesav alleged that YSRC leaders were now misleading the public by claiming the NDDB reports showed no adulteration. “After suppressing the truth for two years, they are now running a false narrative,” he charged.
He recalled that during the Telugu Desam government’s 2014–19 tenure, Chief Minister N. Chandrababu Naidu constituted a committee to ensure laddu quality and imposed strict norms, including a ₹250 crore annual turnover requirement for ghee suppliers. “After 2019, the YSRC government diluted these norms by reducing the turnover limit to `150 crore, compromising quality,” he said.
Kesav said devotees had repeatedly complained about the decline in laddu quality during the YSRC regime, but no corrective steps were taken despite the CFTRI report.
After the NDA government assumed office in 2024, Naidu appointed Syamala Rao as joint executive officer of TTD to streamline administration and address the adulteration issue, the minister said.
Kesav urged the Chief Minister to order a comprehensive departmental inquiry and ensure strict action against those responsible. “TTD is linked to the sentiments of lakhs of devotees. Protecting its sanctity is non-negotiable,” he said.
MD Ilyas | DC
Vijayawada, Jan. 31
Finance minister Payyavula Kesav on Saturday accused the previous YSRC government of suppressing a 2022 report on adulterated ghee used in the Tirupati laddu and attempting to politicise the issue through what he termed a false campaign.
Addressing the media here, Kesav said the Central Food Technological Research Institute (CFTRI) had confirmed adulteration in its 2022 report, but the then YSRC government failed to act and buried the findings.
“This is not an issue for political mileage. It concerns the faith of millions of devotees. The Telugu Desam has never politicised the affairs of Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams,” the minister said.
The issue resurfaced after the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB), in its July 2024 reports, detected residues of vegetable and animal fat in ghee supplied to TTD. Based on these findings, a Special Investigation Team filed a charge sheet.
Kesav alleged that YSRC leaders were now misleading the public by claiming the NDDB reports showed no adulteration. “After suppressing the truth for two years, they are now running a false narrative,” he charged.
He recalled that during the Telugu Desam government’s 2014–19 tenure, Chief Minister N. Chandrababu Naidu constituted a committee to ensure laddu quality and imposed strict norms, including a ₹250 crore annual turnover requirement for ghee suppliers. “After 2019, the YSRC government diluted these norms by reducing the turnover limit to `150 crore, compromising quality,” he said.
Kesav said devotees had repeatedly complained about the decline in laddu quality during the YSRC regime, but no corrective steps were taken despite the CFTRI report.
After the NDA government assumed office in 2024, Naidu appointed Syamala Rao as joint executive officer of TTD to streamline administration and address the adulteration issue, the minister said.
Kesav urged the Chief Minister to order a comprehensive departmental inquiry and ensure strict action against those responsible. “TTD is linked to the sentiments of lakhs of devotees. Protecting its sanctity is non-negotiable,” he said. ghee adulteration vegetable fat animal fat charge sheet filed alleged Vijayawada, Krishna, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable fat detected residues of vegetable and animal fat in ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat detected residues of vegetable and animal fat in ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable fat detected residues of vegetable and animal fat in ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat detected residues of vegetable and animal fat in ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable fat detected residues of vegetable and animal fat in ghee adulteration in ghee fflo:supportedBy CFTRI 2022 report CFTRI had confirmed adulteration in its 2022 report residues of vegetable and animal fat in ghee fflo:supportedBy NDDB July 2024 reports NDDB, in its July 2024 reports, detected residues of vegetable and animal fat NDDB July 2024 report fflo:foundIn ghee NDDB, in its July 2024 reports, detected residues of vegetable and animal fat in ghee6a:T10de,CBI chargesheet rules out animal fats in Tirupati laddu ghee | Hyderabad News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Tirupati: The special investigation team of the CBI, in its chargesheet filed in Nellore ACB court, has not made any reference to the ghee supplied to the 
Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) as being adulterated with animal fats. It, however, said the laboratory tests of the ghee samples revealed that synthetic ghee was supplied for making laddu prasadam. It was not cow ghee at all, but ghee made from synthetic material blended with vegetable oils, it said.
Immediately after coming to power, TDP supremo and chief minister N Chandrababu Naidu had in Sept 2024 alleged that ghee adulterated with animal fats had been used to make the laddu prasadam during the previous YSRC govt's tenure (2019 to 2024). The SIT was formed to investigate the allegations that ghee mixed with tallow and lard was supplied to TTD.
The CBI investigation found that the samples drawn from tankers supplied by AR Dairy in July 2024 were not cow ghee samples, but samples of synthetic ghee. It also described the ghee supplied by Bhole Baba dairy and its proxies as "fake ghee".
The TDP, following Naidu's allegation, had released a copy of the lab report from the National Dairy Development Board's Centre for Analysis & Learning in Livestock & Food (NDDB-CALF) that made reference, though with conditions, that the samples were adulterated with animal fats.
According to the chargesheet, the CBI asked NDDB to carry out a fresh round of raw data analysis and further testing of the remaining ghee samples drawn by TTD from four tankers of AR Dairy (on July 6 and 12, 2024) to obtain a conclusive opinion on adulterants used by the dairy. NDDB conducted the tests and submitted its report on March 27 last year.
The chargesheet contains the key findings of the latest lab report. It states the presence of butyric acid was below the limit of quantification in all four samples, suggesting that the content of milk fat was very low.
It also noted that the presence of lauric acid and myristic acid despite very low milk fat content, suggested that there was a presence of coconut oil and/or palm kernel oil. Fatty acid analysis showed the use of palm oil and/or palm stearin. It also said chances of the presence of fish oil in the ghee samples appeared very rare. 
The lab report, as presented in the chargesheet, showed that the milk fat was fake. In two samples there was no cholesterol, concluding that they were made of vegetable oils. The report further stated that the absence of cholesterol suggested that chances of the presence of tallow, lard, and fish oil were "very low".
Based on the fatty acid profile and presence of beta sitosterol in ghee samples, it was concluded that these samples were primarily a mixture of palm oil and/or palm stearin with palm kernel oil, the chargesheet stated. ghee adulteration substitution synthetic ghee vegetable oils beta sitosterol chargesheet filed alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India synthetic ghee fflo:isSubstituteFor cow ghee It was not cow ghee at all, but ghee made from synthetic material synthetic ghee fkg:hasIngredient vegetable oils ghee made from synthetic material blended with vegetable oils NDDB-CALF ghee analysis fso:isPerformedAt NDDB-CALF lab report from the National Dairy Development Board's Centre for Analysis & Learning in Livestock & Food (NDDB-CALF) ghee fflo:hasAdulterant beta sitosterol presence of beta sitosterol in ghee samples NDDB-CALF ghee analysis fso:isPerformedOn ghee samples from AR Dairy testing of the remaining ghee samples drawn by TTD from four tankers of AR Dairy NDDB-CALF ghee analysis result fso:relatesToProperty butyric acid content presence of butyric acid was below the limit of quantification NDDB-CALF ghee analysis result fso:relatesToProperty lauric acid content presence of lauric acid and myristic acid NDDB-CALF ghee analysis result fso:relatesToProperty myristic acid content presence of lauric acid and myristic acid ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil samples were primarily a mixture of palm oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm stearin mixture of palm oil and/or palm stearin ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm kernel oil with palm kernel oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable oils made of vegetable oils6b:T106a,AP Debunks YSRCP's Claims that Ghee Supplied to TTD Not Adulterated with Animal Fat deccanchronicle.com Hyderabad: Andhra Pradesh Finance Minister Payyavula Keshav on Saturday said that the ghee samples from TTD sent to the NDDB clearly stated that there was a possibility of the presence of animal fats, and that Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu had quoted the same report.
Addressing a press conference, he alleged that the previous YSRCP government treated the procurement of ghee for the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) laddu as a commercial transaction, without having faith in Sri Venkateswara Swamy.
"When such a sensational issue comes to the notice of the government, should it not be told to the public or should it be suppressed as they did in 2022? As a responsible person he (CM Naidu) revealed it in an internal meeting," he said.
The minister alleged that the ghee samples sent to Central Food Technological Research Institute (CFTRI) in Mysuru in 2022 clearly stated that the commodity was adulterated. But the previous Jagan Mohan Reddy-led government suppressed the report.
Keshav said that the samples sent to the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) clearly stated that there was a possibility of the presence of animal fats, and that CM Naidu had quoted the same report.
He further said the board appointed by the previous government altered the tendering condition for procurement of ghee paving way for smaller companies with lesser turnover.
Keshav said the Special Investigation Team, which had submitted its chargesheet, clearly stated that the ghee adulteration fraud was to the tune of Rs 240 crore.
He also alleged that the personal assistant of YV Subba Reddy, then TTD Chairman, received Rs 4 crore from dairy companies and that money was diverted to other accounts.
Recently, the SIT had filed the final chargesheet in Nellore ACB Court, naming 36 people as accused, including nine TTD officials, five dairy experts and others in the ghee adulteration case.
The chargesheet noted that dairy experts had allegedly colluded with the ghee manufacturers and observed that the original material which was sold to the temple body as ghee was not at all ghee, but chemically processed palmolein oil and other ingredients.
CM Naidu said in September 2024 that animal fat was used in preparing Tirupati laddus during the previous regime in the state, triggering a massive political row.
During an NDA legislative party meeting in the southern state in 2024, Naidu had alleged that the erstwhile YSRCP government did not even spare Sri  Venkateswara temple and used substandard ingredients and animal fats for making laddus, which are revered and sought after by crores of devotees. The allegations sparked a massive controversy across the country, hurting the sentiments of crores of Hindus. ghee adulteration palmolein oil chargesheet filed alleged Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palmolein oil original material which was sold to the temple body as ghee was not at all ghee, but chemically processed palmolein oil Tirupati laddus fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat animal fat was used in preparing Tirupati laddus laddus fflo:hasAdulterant animal fats used substandard ingredients and animal fats for making laddus laddus fflo:hasAdulterant animal fats used substandard ingredients and animal fats for making laddus ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat possibility of the presence of animal fats ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fats possibility of the presence of animal fats animal fat fflo:detectedBy NDDB analysis samples from TTD sent to the NDDB clearly stated ghee adulteration case prov:wasAssociatedWith TTD officials naming 36 people as accused, including nine TTD officials ghee adulteration case prov:wasAssociatedWith dairy experts naming 36 people as accused, including nine TTD officials, five dairy experts ghee adulteration case prov:wasAssociatedWith ghee manufacturers dairy experts had allegedly colluded with the ghee manufacturers alleged adulteration of laddus prov:wasAttributedTo YSRCP government Naidu had alleged that the erstwhile YSRCP government did not even spare Sri Venkateswara temple and used substandard ingredients6c:T1240,SIT chargesheet confirms adulteration of ghee, says TTD chief thehansindia.com Tirupati: The NDA leaders on Friday continued to attack the opposition YSRCP over the alleged adulteration of ghee used in the preparation of the sacred Srivari laddu prasadam at Tirumala. Senior leaders, including TTD chairman B R Naidu, held separate press conferences in Tirupati and strongly rejected YSRCP’s claim that the CBI-led Special Investigation Team (SIT) had given a clean chit stating that no adulteration had taken place. The NDA leaders made it clear that the SIT had, in fact, reported ghee adulteration and that attempts were being made to mislead devotees by spreading false information. They said the issue was not political but related to the faith and sentiments of millions of devotees.
Addressing the media at the Sri Padmavati Rest House in Tirupati, TTD chairman Naidu said devotees were being deceived with claims of a ‘clean chit’ in the adulterated ghee case. He said there was no truth in the statements that ghee used in laddu preparation was pure. According to him, the SIT chargesheet clearly mentioned that adulteration had taken place.  
He alleged that serious violations occurred during the ghee procurement tender process. He said tender rules were changed to benefit certain parties and contracts were given to firms that did not have the required production capacity. He claimed that nearly 60 lakh kilograms of adulterated ghee, valued at around Rs 250 crore, was purchased. The TTD chairman said that tests conducted by the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) found the presence of animal fat in the ghee. He also expressed concern over the use of dangerous chemicals in the ghee preparation process.  
Naidu urged the SIT to conduct a detailed investigation into large money transactions allegedly deposited in certain bank accounts. He demanded that officials identify whether benami accounts were involved and reveal the real beneficiaries.  
In a separate press conference, Sports Authority of Andhra Pradesh (Saap) chairman A Ravi Naidu said devotees consider Srivari laddu prasadam as a divine offering, equal to the Lord himself. He said using adulterated ghee in its preparation was shameful and unacceptable.  
Ravi Naidu alleged that ghee was prepared without using milk and was adulterated with animal fat, in violation of standards. He further claimed that substances like acetic acid and lactic acid were used, causing an estimated loss of about Rs 247 crore.He clarified that there was no intention to do politics in the name of God but said they could not remain silent when devotees’ sentiments were hurt. He demanded a thorough investigation, public disclosure of facts and strict legal action against those responsible.  
TTD board member G Bhanu Prakash Reddy said the SIT had not given any clean chit and clearly stated that adulteration took place. He accused the YSRCP of misleading people since 2019 by playing with Hindu sentiments. Jana Sena Party Tirupati leader Kiran Royal said the SIT chargesheet clearly mentioned the mixing of animal fat in the ghee. He alleged that YSRCP leaders made TTD employees scapegoats and questioned the role of former leaders in the issue, demanding accountability and atonement for the alleged wrongdoing. ghee adulteration tests conducted by the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) found the presence of animal fat in the ghee ghee was prepared without using milk and was adulterated with animal fat SIT chargesheet clearly mentioned the mixing of animal fat in the ghee recall_triggered India, Tirumala adulteration of ghee fflo:supportedBy SIT chargesheet SIT chargesheet confirms adulteration of ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat tests conducted by the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) found the presence of animal fat in the ghee animal fat fflo:isSubstituteFor milk ghee was prepared without using milk and was adulterated with animal fat ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod use of dangerous chemicals concern over the use of dangerous chemicals in the ghee preparation process ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat ghee was prepared without using milk and was adulterated with animal fat ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat mixing of animal fat in the ghee mixing of animal fat in ghee fflo:supportedBy SIT chargesheet SIT chargesheet clearly mentioned the mixing of animal fat in the ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant acetic acid substances like acetic acid and lactic acid were used ghee fflo:hasAdulterant lactic acid substances like acetic acid and lactic acid were used ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod preparation without milk ghee was prepared without using milk6d:T975,Lokesh alleges YSRCP sat on ghee report | Vijayawada News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Kakinada: HRD ministerNara Lokesh has urged the TDP cadres to stay alert to the "false campaign" allegedly being carried out by opposition parties on the Tirupati laddu issue. He recalled that the TDP was earlier blamed for the killing of YS Vivekananda Reddy and the knife attack on YS Jaganmohan Reddy.
He alleged that the YSRCP, which was involved in cases of adulterated liquor and ghee, was now raising questions about the prasadam of Tirumala. Stating that he does not want to politicise the laddu issue, he said people should be aware of the facts.
Lokesh claimed that the TDP government had taken steps to ensure quality ghee supply to the TTD and conducted tests as per guidelines till 2019. He said that the TDP government procured most of its ghee from the Karnataka Milk Federation, but the YSRCP later changed the guidelines to benefit small companies.
He further alleged that the YSRCP government sat on a report in which the ghee supplied in 2022 failed quality tests. "As per the directions of chief minister Chandrababu Naidu, it was found that animal fat and vegetable oil were present in the ghee in a test conducted by a Central government-approved institution," he said. He claimed that the CBI also mentioned this on page 35 of its chargesheet.
Lokesh said that the YSRCP has now started a new "drama" over the Tirupati laddu issue. ghee adulteration animal fat vegetable oil alleged Kakinada, Krishna, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat animal fat and vegetable oil were present in the ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable oil animal fat and vegetable oil were present in the ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod substitution of pure ghee with animal fat and vegetable oil animal fat and vegetable oil were present in the ghee ghee supplied in 2022 failed quality tests prov:wasAttributedTo YSRCP YSRCP government sat on a report in which the ghee supplied in 2022 failed quality tests substitution of pure ghee with animal fat and vegetable oil fflo:hasFraudType Substitution animal fat and vegetable oil were present in the ghee IncidentFinding of adulterated ghee fflo:producedBy LaboratoryTest test conducted by a Central government-approved institution IncidentFinding of adulterated ghee fflo:supportedBy CBI chargesheet CBI also mentioned this on page 35 of its chargesheet6e:Tde4,Andhra Minister debunks YSRCP's claims that ghee supplied to TTD not adulterated with animal fat indiatimes.com Addressing a press conference, he alleged that the previous YSRCP government treated the procurement of ghee for the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) laddu as a commercial transaction, without having faith in Sri Venkateswara Swamy.
"When such a sensational issue comes to the notice of the government, should it not be told to the public or should it be suppressed as they did in 2022? As a responsible person he (CM Naidu) revealed it in an internal meeting," he said.
The minister alleged that the ghee samples sent to Central Food Technological Research Institute (CFTRI) in Mysuru in 2022 clearly stated that the commodity was adulterated. But the previous Jagan Mohan Reddy-led government suppressed the report.
Keshav said that the samples sent to the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) clearly stated that there was a possibility of the presence of animal fats, and that CM Naidu had quoted the same report.
Recently, the SIT had filed the final chargesheet in Nellore ACB Court, naming 36 people as accused, including nine TTD officials, five dairy experts and others in the ghee adulteration case.
The chargesheet noted that dairy experts had allegedly colluded with the ghee manufacturers and observed that the original material which was sold to the temple body as ghee was not at all ghee, but chemically processed palmolein oil and other ingredients.
CM Naidu said in September 2024 that animal fat was used in preparing Tirupati laddus during the previous regime in the state, triggering a massive political row.
During an NDA legislative party meeting in the southern state in 2024, Naidu had alleged that the erstwhile YSRCP government did not even spare Sri Venkateswara temple and used substandard ingredients and animal fats for making laddus, which are revered and sought after by crores of devotees.
The allegations sparked a massive controversy across the country, hurting the sentiments of crores of Hindus. ghee adulteration palmolein oil chargesheet_filing alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palmolein oil original material which was sold to the temple body as ghee was not at all ghee, but chemically processed palmolein oil Tirupati laddus fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat animal fat was used in preparing Tirupati laddus palmolein oil fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee sold to the temple body as ghee was not at all ghee, but chemically processed palmolein oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fats possibility of the presence of animal fats ghee adulteration case prov:wasAssociatedWith TTD officials naming 36 people as accused, including nine TTD officials ghee adulteration case prov:wasAssociatedWith dairy experts naming 36 people as accused, including nine TTD officials, five dairy experts ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat ghee samples ... clearly stated that the commodity was adulterated ghee adulteration analysis fso:isPerformedAt Central Food Technological Research Institute ghee samples sent to Central Food Technological Research Institute (CFTRI) SIT chargesheet filing fflo:issuedBy Nellore ACB Court SIT had filed the final chargesheet in Nellore ACB Court ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith ghee manufacturers dairy experts had allegedly colluded with the ghee manufacturers ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith YSRCP government alleged that the erstwhile YSRCP government did not even spare Sri Venkateswara temple and used substandard ingredients6f:Tb76,SIT Chargesheet in Laddu Ghee Case Sparks Political Sparring in Tirupati deccanchronicle.com YSRC claims no proof of animal fat use; NDA says report confirms adulteration
Tirupati: The Special Investigation Team (SIT) charge sheet in the Tirumala laddu ghee adulteration case triggered a political confrontation in Tirupati on Friday, with leaders of the NDA alliance and the YSR Congress Party (YSRC) offering sharply divergent interpretations of the findings.
Former TTD Trust Board chairman and senior YSRC leader Bhumana Karunakar Reddy performed a ‘Srinivasa Prasada Ninda Parihara Homam’ at his office premises, stating that the ritual was intended to atone for what he described as an insult to the sanctity of Lord Venkateswara’s laddu prasadam. He said the homam was conducted after the CBI-led SIT charge sheet, according to him, failed to substantiate Chief Minister N. Chandrababu Naidu’s allegation that animal fats were used in the ghee supplied during the previous YSRC government.
Bhumana alleged that repeated public statements by the NDA government had hurt the sentiments of devotees and damaged the reputation of Tirumala. He questioned the temple steps cleansing programme undertaken by Deputy Chief Minister Pawan Kalyan and claimed that the ghee supplier under investigation had been supplying to TTD since 2013, including during the TD regime between 2014 and 2019.
Rejecting the YSRC’s claims, the NDA alliance said the SIT had not given any clean chit. Addressing a press conference, TD leader and SAAP chairman A. Ravi Naidu said the charge sheet clearly pointed to adulteration and serious irregularities in procurement during the previous regime.
He alleged that synthetic material was manufactured without milk, adulterated with animal fat below 10 per cent to meet prescribed S-value standards, and mixed with chemicals such as acetic acid and lactic acid, as detailed in the 219-page charge sheet. He said conducting religious rituals while claiming exoneration was misleading the public.
BJP State spokesperson and TTD Trust Board member G. Bhanuprakash Reddy said the SIT report established that the material supplied was not ghee but a chemical-based synthetic product. He alleged violations of procurement norms and challenged YSRC leaders to an open debate on decisions taken during their tenure. ghee adulteration substitution synthetic material chargesheet alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India synthetic material fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee material supplied was not ghee but a chemical-based synthetic product ghee fflo:hasAdulterant acetic acid mixed with chemicals such as acetic acid synthetic material fflo:hasAdulterationMethod manufactured without milk synthetic material was manufactured without milk adulteration and serious irregularities in procurement fflo:supportedBy 219-page charge sheet charge sheet clearly pointed to adulteration and serious irregularities70:T1aaa,No Beef Fat In Tirupati Ghee, CBI Finds Synthetic Adulteration But No Animal Fat thequint.com The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) has concluded that the ghee used in the preparation of Tirupati laddu prasadam between 2019 and 2024 did not contain any animal fat. However, the investigation found that the ghee was adulterated with synthetic materials, including vegetable oils and chemical esters, rather than being made from pure milk or butter.
The findings have led to significant political debate in Andhra Pradesh, with various parties demanding accountability and clarification.
Instead, the ghee was found to be a synthetic product, manufactured using palm oil, palm kernel oil, and laboratory esters to mimic the properties of dairy ghee. The investigation revealed that the supplier, Bhole Baba Organic Dairy, did not procure any milk or butter during the period in question.
As reported by Hindustan Times, the CBI-led Special Investigation Team (SIT) found that the accused used refined palm oils and chemical additives to adjust laboratory test values and replicate the aroma and appearance of genuine ghee.
The SIT named 36 individuals in the conspiracy, including TTD officials and directors of the supplier companies, and detailed how tenders were obtained using false documentation.
As highlighted by The Hindu, the SIT’s report did not refer to the product as ‘ghee’ at any point, instead describing it as a synthetic chemical-based product. The NDA Alliance leadership criticized the previous TTD trust board for procuring this product, stating that the board had not sourced any milk from cattle rearers and had misled the public regarding the quality of the prasadam ingredients.
Political reactions have intensified following the release of the chargesheet. Statements from YSRCP leaders demanded public apologies from Chief Minister N. Chandrababu Naidu and Deputy Chief Minister Pawan Kalyan, who had previously alleged the presence of animal fat in the ghee.
The YSRCP cited laboratory reports from the ICAR–National Dairy Research Institute and the National Dairy Development Board, which confirmed the absence of animal fat in the tested samples.
“The CBI chargesheet confirms no animal fat was used in TTD laddus. Those who misled devotees with false narratives must take responsibility,” a YSRCP spokesperson stated, as quoted in the official party communication.
Coverage revealed that the Jana Sena Party (JSP) has resolved to highlight the issue of ghee adulteration in the state legislature, focusing on the alleged misconduct during the previous administration. JSP leaders emphasized the need for comprehensive study and debate on the matter, while also addressing the impact on religious sentiments among devotees.
Further details from the investigation showed that the adulteration involved the use of acetic acid esters and beta carotene to manipulate standard purity tests and mimic the color and flavor of traditional ghee. The syndicate allegedly routed synthetic ghee through multiple entities to bypass procurement restrictions after being blacklisted.
“It is an unforgivable offence. Using adulterated ghee made from synthetic oils and chemicals without a trace of milk is a crime that cannot be pardoned,” said Nara Lokesh, TDP general secretary, as cited in the ongoing political debate.
Political tensions remain high as details emerged about the scale of the operation, with over 68 lakh kilograms of adulterated ghee valued at more than ₹230 crore supplied to TTD. The SIT’s findings have led to calls for further investigation into procurement practices during previous administrations.
Public scrutiny continues following reports that the SIT did not find any evidence of animal fat but confirmed the use of synthetic substitutes, raising concerns about food safety and religious integrity at one of India’s most significant temples.
Note: This article is produced using AI-assisted tools and is based on publicly available information. It has been reviewed by The Quint's editorial team before publishing. ghee adulteration beta carotene synthetic oils chargesheet alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant beta carotene adulteration involved the use of acetic acid esters and beta carotene to manipulate standard purity tests and mimic the color and flavor of traditional ghee. ghee fflo:hasAdulterant synthetic oils adulterated ghee made from synthetic oils synthetic oils fflo:isSubstituteFor milk adulterated ghee made from synthetic oils and chemicals without a trace of milk Tirupati laddu prasadam fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil manufactured using palm oil, palm kernel oil, and laboratory esters Tirupati laddu prasadam fflo:hasAdulterant palm kernel oil manufactured using palm oil, palm kernel oil, and laboratory esters Tirupati laddu prasadam fflo:hasAdulterant laboratory esters manufactured using palm oil, palm kernel oil, and laboratory esters Tirupati ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba Organic Dairy The investigation revealed that the supplier, Bhole Baba Organic Dairy, did not procure any milk or butter Tirupati ghee adulteration method fflo:hasFraudType Substitution rather than being made from pure milk or butter Tirupati ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod replicating aroma and appearance replicate the aroma and appearance of genuine ghee Tirupati ghee adulteration method fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional accused used refined palm oils and chemical additives to adjust laboratory test values Tirupati ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith TTD officials SIT named 36 individuals in the conspiracy, including TTD officials Tirupati ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith directors of the supplier companies SIT named 36 individuals in the conspiracy, including TTD officials and directors of the supplier companies Tirupati ghee adulteration prov:used ghee ghee used in the preparation of Tirupati laddu prasadam absence of animal fat in tested samples fflo:supportedBy laboratory reports from the ICAR–National Dairy Research Institute and the National Dairy Development Board laboratory reports from the ICAR–National Dairy Research Institute and the National Dairy Development Board, which confirmed the absence of animal fat ghee fflo:hasAdulterant acetic acid esters adulteration involved the use of acetic acid esters acetic acid esters fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee mimic the color and flavor of traditional ghee beta carotene fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee mimic the color and flavor of traditional ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod manipulation of purity tests manipulate standard purity tests manipulation of purity tests fflo:hasFraudType Masking manipulate standard purity tests and mimic ghee fflo:hasAdulterant chemicals made from synthetic oils and chemicals71:Tf83,Ghee adulteration issue: TTD Chairman seeks deeper SIT probe into money trail thehindu.com T
Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams Trust Board Chairman B. R. Naidu has said that the final charge sheet filed in court by the Special Investigation Team led by the Central Bureau of Investigation has clearly indicted the erstwhile trust board for malpractices in the ghee procurement process.
Addressing a press conference here on Friday, he stated that the SIT probe was not yet comprehensive or conclusive and appealed to the investigating agency to carry out a thorough inquiry into the alleged financial transactions involving crores of rupees credited into certain bank accounts. Though the SIT had traced the money trail up to a certain level, Mr. Naidu said the investigation should be extended further to identify the key beneficiaries behind the alleged irregularities.
Condemning attempts to mislead devotees by claiming that the accused had received a clean chit, he said the charge sheet had clearly established that a synthetic substance was procured in the name of ghee and used in the preparation of the sacred Tirumala Laddus offered as Naivedyam at the Sri Venkateswara temple.
The irregularities pointed out by the SIT included relaxation of tender conditions to favour select firms, while contracts were awarded to companies that lacked the required capacity and infrastructure, he observed. During the previous regime, about 60 lakh kg of synthetic ghee, valued at nearly ₹250 crore, was procured for the preparation of Laddu Prasadam, he said, adding that laboratory reports submitted by the National Dairy Development Board confirmed the presence of animal fat in some of the samples tested.
“The ghee supplied during the previous tenure contained hazardous substances, including certain lethal chemicals that could adversely affect human health. Some dairies were hand-picked purely for commission-driven motives,” Mr. Naidu alleged.
Citing statistics based on ghee procurement over a five-year period, he said nearly 20 crore Laddus were prepared using the adulterated ghee. This, he said, amounted not only to a grave desecration of the sanctity of Tirumala, but also posed a serious health risk to devotees who consumed the Prasadam. Responding to media queries, he demanded micro DNA testing to conclusively establish the quantity and origin of the ghee used.
Published - January 30, 2026 09:22 pm IST ghee adulteration substitution synthetic substance lethal chemicals charge sheet filed alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India synthetic substance fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee synthetic substance was procured in the name of ghee Tirumala Laddus fflo:hasAdulterant synthetic substance synthetic substance was procured in the name of ghee and used in the preparation of the sacred Tirumala Laddus ghee fflo:hasAdulterant lethal chemicals The ghee supplied during the previous tenure contained hazardous substances, including certain lethal chemicals Ghee procurement malpractice prov:wasAssociatedWith Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams Trust Board indicted the erstwhile trust board for malpractices in the ghee procurement process Procurement of synthetic substance as ghee fflo:hasFraudType Substitution synthetic substance was procured in the name of ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat confirmed the presence of animal fat in some of the samples tested lethal chemicals fflo:causesEffect adverse human health effects lethal chemicals that could adversely affect human health adverse human health effects fflo:affectsPopulation devotees posed a serious health risk to devotees who consumed the Prasadam presence of animal fat in some of the samples tested fflo:supportedBy laboratory reports submitted by the National Dairy Development Board laboratory reports submitted by the National Dairy Development Board confirmed the presence of animal fat ghee adulteration incident fflo:inRegion Tirumala desecration of the sanctity of Tirumala72:T87c,43,421 litres of spurious ghee seized from warehouse in city | Jaipur News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Jaipur: As many as 43,421 litres of ghee suspected to be adulterated was seized in Jaipur Thursday from three warehouses linked to Messrs Girdhar Milk Food Product and another unit operating at the same premises by the name of Shri Shyam Milk Food Product. The seized stock comprised 9,065 liters of Bhog Vinayak brand ghee in different pack sizes, 17,741 liters of Haryana Cream brand ghee, and 16,617 liters of Naksh Dairy brand ghee. Food safety officials sent samples of each brand for laboratory testing.
Food safety commissioner T Shubhmangala said the action followed test reports from Pratapgarh district in which Bhog Vinayak brand ghee samples were found unsafe. A team inspected Girdhar Milk Food Product, listed in records as operating from Shyam Vihar Colony, Macheda, Jaipur, and found the firm was not functioning at the licensed address but was conducting the ghee business from another location, in violation of Food Safety and Standards Act.
During the inspection, officials also found Shri Shyam Milk Food Product operating from the same establishment, and the combined stock of the two firms was seized after sampling. 
Authorities said further action will be taken after test reports of the samples are received.
Earlier, the central food testing lab in Jaipur had confirmed the Bhog Vinayak brand ghee sample as unsafe, following which orders were issued for immediate recall of the product from markets across the state, and proceedings were initiated to cancel the firm's food licence. ghee adulteration unsafe_food seizure recall licence_cancellation_proceedings suspected Jaipur, Rajasthan, India analysis of Bhog Vinayak ghee fso:isPerformedAt central food testing lab in Jaipur central food testing lab in Jaipur had confirmed the Bhog Vinayak brand ghee sample as unsafe Bhog Vinayak brand ghee samples found unsafe fflo:constitutes violation of safety standards Bhog Vinayak brand ghee samples were found unsafe recall of Bhog Vinayak ghee fflo:targets Bhog Vinayak brand ghee orders were issued for immediate recall of the product73:T25ce,Political row over final charge sheet which says Tirumala ghee had no animal fat hindustantimes.com Political row over final charge sheet which says Tirumala ghee had no animal fat
The CBI-led SIT's charge sheet on adulterated ghee for Tirumala laddus reveals a political controversy, exonerating the YSRCP amid allegations of animal fat.
The final charge sheet submitted by the Central Bureau of India-led special investigation team (SIT) to the Andhra Pradesh high court on January 23 in connection with the alleged adulterated ghee used in the making of the famed Tirumala laddu has kicked up a political controversy.
The 219-page charge sheet submitted by the SIT, supplemented by various annexures, revealed that the adulterated ghee supplied to the TTD between 2019 and 2024, by the accused dairy firm was not made from cow milk, but was artificially made using palm kernel oil, palm oil and palm stearin. HT has reviewed the final charge sheet.
Quoting the test reports of the ghee provided by the National Dairy Development Board’s Centre for Analysis and Learning in Livestock and Food (NDDB CALF) in Anand, Gujarat; and ICAR-National Dairy Research Institute (ICAR-NDRI) in Karnal, Haryana, the SIT said the ghee samples did not seem to contain beef tallow, pig lard and fish oil, as was suspected initially.
In September 2024, Andhra Pradesh chief minister N Chandrababu Naidu made a sensational allegation that the ghee supplied by certain dairies to the TTD during the YSR Congress Party regime led by YS Jagan Mohan Reddy was mixed with animal fat.
Quoting a lab report from NDDB, Naidu said some samples of ghee which reveal the presence of beef tallow, lard (relating to pig fat), and fish oil in ghee used for the preparation of the laddus.
On Thursday, the YSRCP claimed that the CBI-led SIT exonerated the then government and demanded an apology from the chief minister for making wild allegations stating that the ghee supplied to the TTD for making laddu prasadam contained animal fat, including beef tallow and fish lard.
Senior YSRCP leader and former TTD chairman Bhumana Karunakar Reddy said both Naidu and deputy chief minister Pawan Kalyan had spoken loudly about adulteration of ghee to malign the then Jagan Mohan Reddy government.
“But the CBI report clearly confirmed that no animal fat was found in the Tirupati laddu. The test reports exposed the false propaganda and political drama created by the coalition leaders,” he said.
He said the SIT categorically stated that there was a nexus between certain officials and ghee suppliers, and that there was no mention of any YSRCP leader in the case. He challenged the coalition government to order a CBI probe into ghee supply during the 2014–2019 period to reveal the complete truth.
TDP general secretary and state IT minister Nara Lokesh alleged that the YSRCP was trying to mislead the public even after committing a “grave sin.” He said the CBI-led SIT clearly confirmed adulteration of ghee in the holy prasadam, but the YSRCP was attempting to distort reports and divert public attention.
“It is an unforgivable offence. Using adulterated ghee made from synthetic oils and chemicals without a trace of milk is a crime that cannot be pardoned,” Lokesh said, in an interaction with the cabinet colleagues on Wednesday. He asked them to firmly counter the YSRCP conspiracies and expose the party’s actions before the public.
The ghee adulteration case
During the previous YSRCP regime, the TTD allegedly procured adulterated ghee from a Tamil Nadu-based dairy firm AR Foods for the preparation of sacred “laddu prasadam” offered to the devotees.
The fraud came to light after the Telugu Desam Party-led coalition came to power in June 2024 and ordered an inquiry. After Naidu’s allegations that the ghee was adulterated with animal fat in September 2024, the state government constituted a special investigation team (SIT) headed by inspector general Sarvashreshta Tripathi to probe into the case.
However, the accused challenged the constitution of the SIT by the state government in the Supreme Court and the apex court in October 2024 ordered the creation of a new, independent five-member SIT, replacing the state-appointed SIT.
The SC-appointed SIT, consisting of two CBI officers, two senior police officers from Andhra Pradesh, and one official from the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), has been directly supervised by the CBI director.
The CBI-led SIT took up investigation and interrogated several persons connected with the case. In all, the SIT arrested 10 people, including TTD general manager (procurement) RSSVR Subrahmanyam, Pomil Jain and Bipin Jain, directors of Bhole Baba Dairy, Apurva Vinay Kant Chawda, CEO of Sri Vaishnavi Dairy and Raju Rajasekharan, the MD of AR Dairy.
What the latest charge sheet states
The final charge sheet filed by the SIT has named 36 persons as accused in the supply of adulterated ghee to the TTD during 2019-2024. It said Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain of Bhole Baba dairy and two others entered into criminal conspiracy with other accused persons and purchased refined palm kernel oil, refined palm oil and refined palmolein oil, from Budge Budge Refineries Ltd., Kolkata and other firms through their entities - Harsh Trading Company and Harsh Fresh Dairy Foodz Private Limited.
It said the accused had procured lactic acid food grade from Aristo Chemicals, acetic acid ester, monoglycerides from Sugandh Oils and Chemicals, Shivanshi Trading Company and GR Implex and also procured beta carotene and ghee flavour.
“Without procuring milk as well as butter or cream, they prepared the adulterated ghee in Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Milk Private Limited at Bhagwanpur, by mixing the refined palm oil, refined palm kernel oil and refined palmolein with minimal quantity of ghee along with chemicals to adjust the lab test values and to maintain aroma in adulterated ghee,” the SIT said.
During financial years 2022-23, 2023-24 and 2024-25 (up to September 2024), the accused prepared 68.17 lakh kg of adulterated ghee worth ₹234.51 crore. Though Harsh Fresh Dairy and Bhole Baba Organic Dairy were not eligible to participate in TTD ghee tenders, they managed to get the tenders by submitting false and fabricated documents to meet the TTD tender specifications.
The SIT charged the accused with colluding with TTD officials who were entrusted with the task of inspecting the dairy plants and certify their authenticity. “These plant inspection committee members of the TTD, wilfully did not inspect the dairy plants properly and deliberately submitted favourable plant inspection reports after obtaining undue favours from these companies,” the report said.
“The said adulterated ghee was utilized for the preparation of sacred laddu and other prasadams in TTD which hurt the sentiments of crores of devotees,” the SIT report said.
The SIT also named Kaduru Chinna Appanna, former personal assistant to then TTD chairman YV Subba Reddy, stating that he had demanded bribe of ₹25 per kg as commission amount for supply of adulterated ghee to the TTD. He also accepted a bribe of ₹50 lakh in cash from Jagmohan Gupta of Premier Agri Foods Private Limited to extend the official favour.
- Srinivasa Rao is Senior Assistant Editor based out of Hyderabad covering developments in Andhra Pradesh and Telangana . He has over three decades of reporting experience. ghee adulteration synthetic oils chemicals beta carotene charge_sheet_filed arrests_made alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant synthetic oils adulterated ghee made from synthetic oils ghee fflo:hasAdulterant chemicals adulterated ghee made from synthetic oils and chemicals ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat allegations that the ghee was adulterated with animal fat ghee fflo:hasAdulterant beta carotene procured beta carotene and ghee flavour ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm kernel oil adulterated ghee ... was artificially made using palm kernel oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil adulterated ghee ... was artificially made using palm kernel oil, palm oil and palm stearin ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod artificial production using vegetable oils artificially made using palm kernel oil, palm oil and palm stearin artificial production using vegetable oils fflo:hasFraudType Substitution not made from cow milk, but was artificially made using palm kernel oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod substitution with synthetic oils adulterated ghee made from synthetic oils and chemicals without a trace of milk ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith AR Foods TTD allegedly procured adulterated ghee from a Tamil Nadu-based dairy firm AR Foods ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith RSSVR Subrahmanyam SIT arrested 10 people, including TTD general manager (procurement) RSSVR Subrahmanyam ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba Dairy directors of Bhole Baba Dairy preparation of adulterated ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith Harsh Fresh Dairy the accused prepared 68.17 lakh kg of adulterated ghee preparation of adulterated ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba Organic Dairy the accused prepared 68.17 lakh kg of adulterated ghee adulterated ghee preparation prov:wasAssociatedWith Harsh Fresh Dairy the accused prepared 68.17 lakh kg of adulterated ghee adulterated ghee preparation prov:wasAssociatedWith TTD officials colluding with TTD officials who were entrusted with the task of inspecting the dairy plants adulterated ghee preparation prov:wasAssociatedWith Premier Agri Foods Private Limited Jagmohan Gupta of Premier Agri Foods Private Limited to extend the official favour74:T68a,Adulterated ghee supplied to TTD: MLA thehansindia.com Guntur: Guntur West MLA Galla Madhavi has challenged YSRCP chief YS Jagan Mohan Reddy to come to the Assembly to discuss the issue of adulterated ghee.
Speaking at a press meet held at the TDP office here on Thursday, Madhavi said during 2019–24 YSRCP government, adulterated ghee was supplied to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams, as clearly established by the SIT appointed by the Supreme Court. This adulterated ghee was used in the preparation of the Tirupati laddu prasadam, hurting the sentiments of millions of devotees.  
She criticised the YSRCP government for relaxing the strict rules related to ghee supply tenders after coming to power, thereby enabling companies to supply adulterated ghee. She also pointed out that the TTD board, through a resolution dated 29-02-2020, compromised on quality standards.  
Over five years, the TTD purchased 1.61 crore kilograms of ghee, of which approximately 60 lakh kilograms were adulterated. She demanded that Jagan Mohan Reddy come to the Assembly along with YSRCP members to discuss this matter. ghee adulteration adulterated ghee alleged Guntur, Andhra Pradesh, India adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams adulterated ghee was supplied to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams Tirupati laddu prasadam fkg:hasIngredient ghee This adulterated ghee was used in the preparation of the Tirupati laddu prasadam compromised quality standards prov:wasAssociatedWith TTD board TTD board, through a resolution dated 29-02-2020, compromised on quality standards ghee fflo:hasAdulterant adulterated ghee approximately 60 lakh kilograms were adulterated75:Tea9,TTD Chairman Refutes YSRC’s Claim Of Clean Chit In Laddu Ghee Case deccanchronicle.com The TTD chairman alleged that procurement rules and tender conditions had been deliberately altered during the YSRC regime to allow ghee supply from dairies that lacked the required production capacity and quality standards, allegedly to benefit a few individuals: Reports
TIRUPATI: Rejecting the YSR Congress Party’s claim of a clean chit in the Tirumala laddu ghee case, Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams chairman B.R. Naidu on Friday said the Special Investigation Team (SIT) charge sheet has clearly established that adulterated ghee had been used in preparation of laddus at Tirumala during the rule of the previous YSRC government.
Addressing media on Friday, he accused YSRC leaders of misleading devotees by claiming that the SIT has closed the case. He said the charge sheet explicitly mentions the use of chemicals in the ghee supplied to TTD. Terming YSR Congress claims as shameful, Naidu said the investigation itself had flagged serious violations. He warned of strict action against those responsible for tarnishing the image of TTD.
The TTD chairman alleged that procurement rules and tender conditions had been deliberately altered during the YSRC regime to allow ghee supply from dairies that lacked the required production capacity and quality standards, allegedly to benefit a few individuals. He claimed that about 68 lakh kg of adulterated ghee had been procured and used to prepare around 20 crore laddus. Some of the chemicals allegedly had been highly hazardous and posed serious health risks, he underlined.
“Reports from the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) confirmed the presence of animal fat. SIT has also established adulteration,” Naidu pointed out. He alleged that certain dairies had been selected by the YSRC dispensation after receiving commissions.
The TTD chairman alleged that there had been sustained attempts over the past five years to demean Hindu deities and Hindu society. He demanded that the YSRC tender an unconditional apology to the Hindu community. He questioned the role of former Chief Minister Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy and former TTD chairmen Bhumana Karunakar Reddy and Y.V. Subba Reddy. He asked why Subba Reddy and his wife had not shared their bank account details with the SIT.
Naidu said the charge sheet filed is not final. Further investigations are going on and would expose the role of influential individuals. He urged the SIT to probe alleged financial transactions involving crores of rupees credited to certain bank accounts to identify the benami arrangements.
The TTD chairman went on to demand micro-DNA testing to conclusively establish the quality and origin of the ghee. ghee adulteration substandard chemicals animal fat charge sheet filed investigation ongoing alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant chemicals charge sheet explicitly mentions the use of chemicals in the ghee chemicals fflo:causesEffect serious health risks chemicals allegedly had been highly hazardous and posed serious health risks adulterated ghee fflo:commonIn Tirumala adulterated ghee had been used in preparation of laddus at Tirumala presence of animal fat in ghee fflo:supportedBy Reports from the National Dairy Development Board Reports from the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) confirmed the presence of animal fat. adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt Processing used in preparation of laddus at Tirumala ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat Reports from the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) confirmed the presence of animal fat. ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat Reports from the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) confirmed the presence of animal fat.76:Te95,Rajasthan govt raids adulterated ghee supply chain; 43,000 litres seized assamtribune.com Jaipur, Jan 30: In a statewide drive against food adulteration being carried out in Rajasthan, the state's Food Safety Department took major action under the "Pure Food – War on Adulteration" initiative and seized more than 43,000 litres of ghee suspected to be adulterated.
Rajasthan Food Safety Commissioner Dr. T. Shubhamangala, on Thursday, told that M/s Giridhar Milk Food Product, located in Shyam Vihar Colony at Machera in Jaipur, manufactures ghee under the brand name 'Bhog Vinayak'.
Samples of Bhog Vinayak brand ghee collected from Pratapgarh district were found to be unsafe in laboratory testing.
Following this, under the directions of Rajasthan Additional Commissioner Bhagwat Singh, and Designated Officer and Chief Medical and Health Officer (Jaipur First) Ravi Shekhawat, a team of food safety officers conducted an inspection of the firm.
During the inspection, it was found that the firm was not operating from the address mentioned in its food license and official records, but was instead running its operations from another undisclosed location, which is a clear violation of the Food Safety and Standards Act.
During the inspection, officials also discovered that another firm, Shri Shyam Milk Food Product, was operating from the same premises.
From the three warehouses of both firms, huge stock of ghee was seized which included 9,065 litres of Bhog Vinayak brand ghee (various packing sizes), 17,741 liters of Haryana Cream brand ghee and 16,617 litres of Naksh Dairy brand ghee.
After collecting samples of all brands, the entire 43,421 litres of ghee were seized on the spot.
Further action will be taken under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006, based on the laboratory test reports.
The Additional Commissioner said that earlier, a sample of Bhog Vinayak brand ghee was declared unsafe by the Jaipur Central Laboratory.
Following this report, instructions were issued to immediately withdraw the product from the market across the state.
In view of the serious irregularities, proceedings have also been initiated to cancel the firm's food license.
--IANS ghee unsafe_food adulteration seizure market withdrawal license cancellation proceedings alleged Jaipur, Pratapgarh, Rajasthan, India Bhog Vinayak ghee unsafe finding fflo:inRegion Pratapgarh district Samples of Bhog Vinayak brand ghee collected from Pratapgarh district were found to be unsafe Bhog Vinayak brand ghee unsafe finding fflo:confirmedBy Jaipur Central Laboratory analysis sample of Bhog Vinayak brand ghee was declared unsafe by the Jaipur Central Laboratory ghee adulteration act prov:used ghee manufactures ghee under the brand name 'Bhog Vinayak' Bhog Vinayak brand ghee fflo:hasAdulterant unknown adulterant Samples of Bhog Vinayak brand ghee collected from Pratapgarh district were found to be unsafe in laboratory testing ghee seizure action fflo:targets ghee seized more than 43,000 litres of ghee suspected to be adulterated ghee seizure action fflo:issuedBy Rajasthan Food Safety Department state's Food Safety Department took major action ghee fflo:foundAt Storage From the three warehouses of both firms, huge stock of ghee was seized Bhog Vinayak brand ghee declared unsafe fflo:constitutes violation of food safety standards a sample of Bhog Vinayak brand ghee was declared unsafe by the Jaipur Central Laboratory unsafe ghee finding fflo:triggeredAction market withdrawal instructions were issued to immediately withdraw the product from the market Bhog Vinayak brand ghee declared unsafe fflo:triggeredAction license cancellation a sample of Bhog Vinayak brand ghee was declared unsafe by the Jaipur Central Laboratory77:Tad8,TD Seeks Jagan’s Response on Alleged Adulteration of Tirumala Laddu Ghee deccanchronicle.com Bojjala Sudheer Reddy cites SIT probe, alleges adulteration during YSRC rule
Tirupati: Sri Kalahasti MLA Bojjala Venkata Sudheer Reddy on Thursday demanded that former Chief Minister Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy respond to allegations relating to the alleged use of adulterated ghee in the preparation of Tirumala Srivari laddu prasadam during the YSRC government’s tenure. Referring to the Special Investigation Team (SIT) probe and charge sheet, Sudheer Reddy alleged that the sanctity of Tirumala was compromised between 2019 and 2024. He claimed that laddus were prepared using adulterated ghee containing no milk fat, which, he alleged, had hurt the sentiments of devotees. He alleged that during the five-year YSRC rule, about 1.61 crore kg of ghee was procured for laddu preparation and claimed that a substantial portion was adulterated. He further alleged that laddus were prepared using materials containing palm oil, palmolein and chemical esters, citing laboratory reports, and questioned the procurement process followed during the period. Sudheer Reddy also alleged that tender norms were altered to favour select companies, resulting in the alleged misuse of temple funds. He questioned why YSRC leaders were seeking anticipatory bail and why court orders were obtained to restrain discussion on the issue. Meanwhile, the Telugu Desam Party organised a protest rally in Tirupati over the alleged adulteration. Party leaders and activists marched from the Panchamukha Anjaneya Swamy temple to the Naalugu Kaalla Mandapam, raising slogans, and formed a human chain as part of the protest. Addressing the gathering, Tirupati Urban Development Authority chairman and TTD ex-officio member C. Diwakar Reddy alleged that the SIT had found irregularities in the procurement of ghee and claimed that quality norms were ignored while selecting suppliers. He alleged that deviations from prescribed procedures led to compromises in quality and said such issues occurred due to the failure of the then trust board to adhere to Agama Shastra norms for prasadam preparation. Tirumala Srivari laddu adulteration adulterated ghee charge sheet alleged Tirupati, Andhra Pradesh, India Tirumala Srivari laddu fflo:hasAdulterant adulterated ghee alleged use of adulterated ghee in the preparation of Tirumala Srivari laddu Tirumala Srivari laddu fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil laddus were prepared using materials containing palm oil alleged adulteration of Tirumala laddu prov:wasAttributedTo Bojjala Venkata Sudheer Reddy Sudheer Reddy alleged that the sanctity of Tirumala was compromised alleged adulteration of Tirumala laddu fflo:supportedBy laboratory reports citing laboratory reports78:Td5f,TTD ghee adulteration case dominates Cabinet meet thehansindia.com Vijayawada: The Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) adulterated ghee case figured prominently in the Andhra Pradesh Cabinet meeting on Wednesday, with Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu told ministers to wait until the Special Investigation Team (SIT) report is officially received by State government. According to sources, the issue was discussed at length during the Cabinet meeting, amid mounting political attacks from the YSR Congress Party (YSRCP) over the SIT report. Ministers expressed strong displeasure over what they described as “misinformation and propaganda” being spread by the opposition on the SIT findings. They argued that the adulteration had taken place during the previous YSRCP government and accused party leaders of attempting to shift blame onto the present administration.
Officials informed the Cabinet that the SIT, formed under the supervision of the CBI, has already filed a chargesheet in the case. In view of this, the Chief Minister told ministers to respond after the report is formally received and made public.  
During the discussion, ministers referred to the alleged deposit of Rs 4.5 crore in a bank account linked to YV Subba Reddy’s personal assistant. They said officials had pointed out that the dairies involved in supplying ghee did not have sufficient milk collection or production capacity.  
According to ministers, investigations revealed that some contracted dairies had mixed chemicals to manufacture ghee, instead of producing it through proper dairy processes. “This was not an accidental lapse. It was deliberate adulteration,” one minister reportedly said during the meeting. Ministers also claimed that attempts are now being made to cover up past irregularities by targeting the current government. “A mistake was made. Adulteration happened. Now they are trying to escape responsibility through falsehood,” sources quoted ministers as saying.  
Chief Minister Naidu reportedly took a firm stand on the matter. He criticised YSRCP leaders for approaching the Supreme Court against the formation of the SIT in the past and now continuing their attacks even after a CBI-supervised investigation was completed. He is learnt to have remarked that the party’s conduct reflected “criminal tendencies” and said its leaders were trying to distort facts to mislead the public. The Chief Minister stressed that any official response would come only after the SIT report is formally obtained by government. Naidu also asked his Cabinet colleagues to remain alert, warning that the issue could be used to trigger political instability. ghee adulteration chemicals chargesheet filed alleged Vijayawada, Andhra Pradesh, India TTD ghee adulteration case fflo:inRegion Andhra Pradesh The Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) adulterated ghee case figured prominently in the Andhra Pradesh Cabinet meeting ghee fflo:hasAdulterant chemicals mixed chemicals to manufacture ghee mixing chemicals to manufacture ghee fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional This was not an accidental lapse. It was deliberate adulteration ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith contracted dairies contracted dairies had mixed chemicals to manufacture ghee mixing chemicals to manufacture ghee fflo:hasFraudType Substitution mixed chemicals to manufacture ghee, instead of producing it through proper dairy processes79:T1898,‘Artificial Ghee Supplied...’: Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams Laddu Ghee Found Adulterated With Palm Oil, SIT Chargesheet Names 36 Accused, Exposes Hawala Link newsx.com Tirupati laddu adulteration case: The Special Investigation Team (SIT) has filed its final chargesheet in the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) laddu ghee adulteration case, revealing that the ghee used in the sacred prasdam was heavily adulterated with vegetable oils, primarily palm oil.
Citing laboratory findings by the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB), the SIT said the supplied ghee was “artificial” in nature, named 36 accused in the case, and exposed a hawala-linked money trail used to fund and sustain the adulteration network.
The SIT in its report cited the findings of the National Dairy Development Board’s Centre for Analysis and Learning in Livestock and Food (NDDB-CALF), Anand, and its report dated March 27, 2025, has also been submitted as part of the investigation.
What Did Lab Tests Reveal About Ghee?
The SIT chargesheet stated that Uttarakhand-based Bhole Baba Dairy, in collusion with certain TTD staff members, supplied adulterated ghee for use in laddu preparation.
Laboratory analysis conducted by the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) found that the milk fat content in all four ghee samples was almost absent, with several key parameters of pure cow ghee failing to meet mandated quality standards.
The report further noted that the presence of animal fat, such as tallow or lard, was extremely minimal. While traces of fish oil indicator- Eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) were detected, they were below measurable limits, effectively ruling out the use of fish oil.
The findings concluded that the ghee largely comprised vegetable oils and plant-based fats, with a very low likelihood of any animal fat content.
Who Are Accused in Artifical Ghee Supply?
The SIT charge sheet has named 36 individuals and detailed a carefully planned conspiracy to produce and distribute artificial ghee. Investigators allege that promoters of Uttarakhand-based Bhole Baba Dairy, Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain, spearheaded the operation by using trusted associates to manufacture adulterated ghee, which was then routed to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams through a network of intermediary firms.
How Did Hawala Money Trail Operate?
Investigators said a key aspect of the probe centres on the use of illegal hawala channels to finance and sustain the adulterated ghee supply chain. According ot the SIT, directors of Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Milk Pvt. Ltd. allegedly worked with intermediaries to route adulterated ghee to the Tirumala Devasthanams through Sri Vyshnavi Dairy Specialities Pvt. Ltd.
In exchange, they reportedly received Rs 12.25 crore in cash via hawala from Vijayawada-based agent Bharat Bhai Thakur and another Rs 7.31 crore from Chennai-based hawala operator Madaram Dewasi.
The probe agency said these cash transactions, carried out between 2023 and 2024 on behalf of Pomil Jain, were designed to bypass formal banking systems and conceal proceeds from food adulteration, amounting to large-scale money laundering. The investigation further revealed that the supply of adulterated ghee extended beyond TTD.
During 2022–23, over 1.12 lakh kg was supplied to agencies in Tirupati, while more than 11.3 lakh kg was distributed to temples across Andhra Pradesh between May 2021 and September 2024 through dealer networks.
Evidence of similar supplies to temples in Maharashtra has also been found, with inquiries into the full inter-state network and financial routing still underway.
Manisha Chauhan is a passionate journalist with 3 years of experience in the media industry, covering everything from trending entertainment buzz and celebrity spotlights to thought-provoking book reviews and practical health tips. Known for blending fresh perspectives with reader-friendly writing, she creates content that informs, entertains, and inspires. When she’s not chasing the next viral story, you’ll find her diving into a good book or exploring new wellness trends. ghee adulteration palm oil vegetable oils chargesheet filed alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil the ghee used in the sacred prasdam was heavily adulterated with vegetable oils, primarily palm oil ghee analysis fso:isPerformedOn ghee samples Laboratory analysis conducted by the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) found that the milk fat content in all four ghee samples was almost absent TTD laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba Dairy Uttarakhand-based Bhole Baba Dairy, in collusion with certain TTD staff members, supplied adulterated ghee TTD laddu ghee adulteration prov:used ghee ghee used in the sacred prasdam was heavily adulterated ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable oils adulterated with vegetable oils ghee analysis fso:isPerformedAt NDDB-CALF Laboratory analysis conducted by the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) ghee adulteration method fflo:hasFraudType Substitution ghee used in the sacred prasdam was heavily adulterated with vegetable oils TTD laddu ghee adulteration fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional in collusion with certain TTD staff members TTD laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith 36 accused named 36 accused in the case artificial ghee production prov:wasAssociatedWith Pomil Jain Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain, spearheaded the operation artificial ghee production prov:wasAssociatedWith Vipin Jain Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain, spearheaded the operation adulterated ghee production and distribution prov:wasAssociatedWith Sri Vyshnavi Dairy Specialities Pvt. Ltd. route adulterated ghee to the Tirumala Devasthanams through Sri Vyshnavi Dairy Specialities Pvt. Ltd. adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt temples across Andhra Pradesh more than 11.3 lakh kg was distributed to temples across Andhra Pradesh ghee fflo:foundAt agencies in Tirupati over 1.12 lakh kg was supplied to agencies in Tirupati adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt temples in Maharashtra Evidence of similar supplies to temples in Maharashtra has also been found Adulterated ghee supply to Maharashtra temples fflo:inRegion Maharashtra Evidence of similar supplies to temples in Maharashtra has also been found7a:T1111,TTD Ghee Adulteration Row Sparks Political Storm; Cabinet Seeks SIT Report deccanchronicle.com Chief Minister N. Chandrababu Naidu reiterated that the government would respond only after the SIT report is officially made public, and urged ministers to remain vigilant.
Vijayawada: The Andhra Pradesh Cabinet on Wednesday held extensive discussions on the political controversy surrounding the ghee adulteration in preparation of TTD laddus, and the allegations being made by the opposition over the special investigation team’s report.
The cabinet took note of the “misleading propaganda” by the YSR Congress. Ministers expressed concern over statements by YSRC leaders that the SIT had given TTD a “clean chit” by concluding that no adulteration took place in the ghee used by devasthanam for laddu preparations.
Not convinced, the cabinet decided to formally obtain a copy of the SIT report.
Officials briefed the cabinet that the SIT, constituted under the supervision of the CBI, has filed a charge-sheet. In the interim, Naidu asked ministers to refrain from making public comments. “Let us examine it first,” he said.
Ministers noted that officials had clearly stated that the adulteration occurred during the previous YSRC government’s term. They pointed to alleged financial irregularities, including the deposit of about `4.5 crore into an account linked to the personal assistant of YV Subba Reddy.
The cabinet meeting also noted that, as per official assessments, the dairies involved in supplying the ghee to TTD neither had the required milk procurement capacity nor the infrastructure to produce the quantities supplied. Some dairies allegedly resorted to mixing chemicals to manufacture ghee.
The chief minister made sharp remarks on the issue and recalled the earlier cases to underline a similar pattern. He criticised YSRC leaders for opposing the formation of an SIT and approaching the Supreme Court. Yet, he said, they are spreading false narratives now.
Emphasizing caution, Naidu advised all ministers to remain vigilant and reiterated that the government would respond officially only after the SIT report is formally made public.
Education Minister Nara Lokesh launched a scathing attack on YSRC chief and former chief minister YS Jagan Mohan Reddy. He said, “Only Jagan Reddy could commit such a grave sin and still try to deny it.”
Lokesh held a breakfast meeting with ministers at his Undavalli camp office. He raised the issue of adulterated ghee in the Tirupati laddus. He lashed out at Jagan Reddy, saying that even after it was confirmed that adulteration had occurred in the Tirupati laddus, he was “distorting the report and misleading the public.”
The minister stated that creating adulterated ghee without any milk content and desecrating the divine offering was an unforgivable crime. The minister said Jagan Reddy “not only caused a scam worth hundreds of crores but is now attempting to mislead the public with falsehoods.”
In the meeting with ministerial colleagues, Lokesh suggested that they strongly counter the YSRC's “conspiracies” and expose their misdeeds to the people. ghee adulteration chemicals charge-sheet filed alleged Vijayawada, Krishna, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee adulteration in preparation of TTD laddus prov:wasAssociatedWith TTD ghee adulteration in preparation of TTD laddus ghee fflo:hasAdulterant chemicals Some dairies allegedly resorted to mixing chemicals to manufacture ghee. ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod mixing chemicals Some dairies allegedly resorted to mixing chemicals to manufacture ghee. ghee fflo:hasAdulterant unspecified adulterant ghee adulteration in preparation of TTD laddus CBI prov:wasAssociatedWith SIT SIT, constituted under the supervision of the CBI ghee adulteration incident fflo:inRegion Andhra Pradesh The Andhra Pradesh Cabinet on Wednesday held extensive discussions adulteration prov:used ghee He raised the issue of adulterated ghee in the Tirupati laddus. Tirupati laddus fflo:hasAdulterant chemicals Some dairies allegedly resorted to mixing chemicals to manufacture ghee. mixing chemicals to manufacture ghee fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional Some dairies allegedly resorted to mixing chemicals to manufacture ghee. adulteration in Tirupati laddus fflo:inRegion Tirupati He raised the issue of adulterated ghee in the Tirupati laddus.7b:T84d,APCC seeks recovery of ₹250 crore from former TTD officials in ghee adulteration case thehindu.com Andhra Pradesh Congress Committee vice-president Kolanukonda Shivaji on Sunday demanded that the money allegedly misappropriated from the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams during the YSRCP government be recovered from those responsible, including the then Chairman, officials and their personal assistants.
In a statement, Mr. Shivaji alleged that between 2019 and 2024, about 60 lakh kg of adulterated ghee, prepared without the use of proper dairy inputs such as milk or butter, was utilised in the preparation of nearly 20 crore laddu prasadam. He said the Special Investigation Team report had revealed that chemicals were mixed with palm oil to adulterate the ghee, resulting in the illegal diversion of around ₹250 crore of devotees’ funds. The investigating team, he added, had established that the adulterated ghee was directly used in the preparation of laddu prasadam.
Accusing the then Chairman, officials and their personal staff of misusing their authority and positions to indulge in large-scale irregularities at Tirumala, Mr. Shivaji demanded that the government immediately initiate recovery proceedings under the Revenue Recovery Act to reclaim the misappropriated funds from all those who held positions of authority between 2019 and 2024.
Published - January 25, 2026 11:36 pm IST ghee adulteration palm oil chemicals alleged Tirumala, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil chemicals were mixed with palm oil to adulterate the ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant chemicals chemicals were mixed with palm oil to adulterate the ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil chemicals were mixed with palm oil to adulterate the ghee laddu prasadam fkg:hasIngredient ghee adulterated ghee was directly used in the preparation of laddu prasadam ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith TTD officials recovery of ₹250 crore from former TTD officials in ghee adulteration case ghee adulteration fflo:hasFraudType Substitution prepared without the use of proper dairy inputs such as milk or butter7c:Tc94,Tirupati laddu ghee case: CBI SIT names 36 accused, including TTD officials thehindubusinessline.com A CBI special investigation team probing the Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration case has named 36 people, including nine TTD officials and five dairy experts, as accused in the matter.
As per the findings of the probe, the original material which was sold to the Sri Venkateswara Swamy temple body as ghee was not at all ghee but chemically processed palmolein oil and other ingredients.
The SIT filed its final chargesheet in the Nellore ACB court on Friday, said a source.
"Thirty six people are accused, including nine TTD officials and five dairy experts. The dairy experts colluded with manufacturers," the source told PTI on Saturday.
Accusing several persons and ghee suppliers, the SIT's remand report had earlier observed that adulterated ghee was made by mixing ingredients such as palm oil, palm kernel oil and palmolein.
Along with minimal quality of ghee, chemicals such as beta carotene, acetic acid ester, ghee flavour and other adulterants were used to adjust lab test values and maintain aroma in the adulterated ghee, said the report.
Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu had claimed in September 2024 that animal fat was used in preparing Tirupati laddus (consecrated sweet) during the previous YS Jagan Mohan Reddy-led regime in the state, triggering a massive political row.
During an NDA legislative party meeting in the southern state in 2024, Naidu had alleged that the erstwhile YSRCP government did not even spare the world famous Tirupati temple and used substandard ingredients and animal fats for making laddus, which are revered and sought after by crores of devotees.
The allegations sparked a massive controversy across the country, hurting the sentiments of crores of Hindus.
Published on January 25, 2026 ghee adulteration adulterated ghee was made by mixing ingredients such as palm oil, palm kernel oil and palmolein. chemicals such as beta carotene, acetic acid ester, ghee flavour and other adulterants were used to adjust lab test values and maintain aroma in the adulterated ghee alleged India, Tirupati ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palmolein oil not at all ghee but chemically processed palmolein oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil adulterated ghee was made by mixing ingredients such as palm oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm kernel oil adulterated ghee was made by mixing ingredients such as palm oil, palm kernel oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant acetic acid ester chemicals such as beta carotene, acetic acid ester, ghee flavour and other adulterants were used to adjust lab test values and maintain aroma in the adulterated ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant ghee flavour acetic acid ester, ghee flavour and other adulterants Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith TTD officials including nine TTD officials and five dairy experts, as accused Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith dairy experts including nine TTD officials and five dairy experts, as accused Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith ghee suppliers Accusing several persons and ghee suppliers ghee fflo:hasAdulterant beta carotene chemicals such as beta carotene7d:Tea2,TTD laddu ghee adulteration case: CBI-SIT files final chargesheet, names 36 accused | Amaravati News - The Times of India indiatimes.com TIRUPATI: The CBI-led SIT concluded its probe into the TTD laddu ghee adulteration case, and the final chargesheet was filed before the ACB court in Nellore on Friday.
In its final chargesheet, the SIT concluded that the Uttarakhand-based Bhole Baba Dairy, in connivance with TTD staffers and external dairy experts, supplied 68 lakh kg of synthetic fake ghee worth about Rs 250 cr to the Tirupati trust between 2021 and 2024, in what could be seen as one of the biggest-ever procurement scams reported in the TTD.
While the SIT named 36 persons as accused in the chargesheet, nine among them were arrested in the past, out of whom six were granted bail, and three accused, including Delhi-based chemicals supplier Ajay Kumar Sugandh, Chinna Appanna, and TTD ex-procurement GM RSSVR Subrahmanyam, are still in jail.
The SC ordered a CBI-SIT probe into the TTD laddu ghee adulteration case in Oct 2024.
SIT exposes plot by dairy cos, promotersJD Veeresh Prabhu and DIG Murali Rambha from the CBI, IG Sarvashresth Tripathi and DIG Gopinath Jatti from the AP police, and Dr Satyen Panda from the FSSAI were appointed to the SIT. They were supported by a local police force of 30 personnel led by Tirupati additional SP Venkat Rao.
 Following a 15 month-long detailed investigation, the CBI-led SIT concluded its investigation and filed the final chargesheet in the ACB court.
 During the course of a detailed in-depth investigation, the SIT established the modus operandi of the Uttarakhand-based Bhole Baba Dairy promoters Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain, who allegedly conspired with other dairy representatives, including Tamil Nadu-based AR dairy and Tirupati-based Vyshnavi dairy, and connived with the procurement dept staff of the TTD and the external dairy experts of the Tirupati trust, and managed to supply 68 lakh kgs of synthetic ghee without procuring even a single drop of milk.
 While the CBI arrested Subrahmanyam in the case, seven more TTD staffers, who worked in the procurement dept and connived with the Bhole Baba promoters were arraigned in the case.
 During the course of the investigation, the SIT also established that external dairy expert Vijaya Bhaskar Reddy connived with Bhole Baba promoters and gave favourable reports for them to successfully bag TTD's ghee supply contracts worth several hundreds of crores of rupees. ghee adulteration substitution synthetic fake ghee chargesheet filed alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India synthetic fake ghee fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee supplied 68 lakh kg of synthetic fake ghee synthetic ghee fflo:isSubstituteFor milk supply 68 lakh kgs of synthetic ghee without procuring even a single drop of milk TTD laddu ghee adulteration prov:used ghee supplied 68 lakh kg of synthetic fake ghee TTD laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith TTD staffers in connivance with TTD staffers TTD laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith external dairy experts in connivance with TTD staffers and external dairy experts TTD laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Ajay Kumar Sugandh accused, including Delhi-based chemicals supplier Ajay Kumar Sugandh TTD laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith RSSVR Subrahmanyam TTD ex-procurement GM RSSVR Subrahmanyam Bhole Baba Dairy prov:wasAssociatedWith Vipin Jain Uttarakhand-based Bhole Baba Dairy promoters Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain Bhole Baba Dairy prov:wasAssociatedWith AR dairy conspired with other dairy representatives, including Tamil Nadu-based AR dairy Bhole Baba Dairy prov:wasAssociatedWith TTD procurement dept staff connived with the procurement dept staff of the TTD7e:Td91,TTD laddu row: Uttarakhand-based dairy, 24 others named in final chargesheet of CBI-led SIT | Today News livemint.com The probe into the sensational Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) laddu row, or the ghee adulteration case, that rocked the administration last year, has come to a conclusion after 15 long months.
According to The Hindu report, the Special Investigation Team (SIT) formed under the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) has submitted its final chargesheet before the ACB Court in Nellore.
In the chargesheet, they have reportedly named Uttarakhand-based Bhole Baba Dairy for having connived with some employees of the TTD. External dairy experts were also named in the charge sheet for getting orders to supply synthetic ghee, which was later allegedly used in the preparation of laddu prasadam.
Fake ghee of approximately 68 lakh kg worth ₹250 crore was supplied to the Tirumala temple management during 2021-2024, according to the report.
A total of 24 persons had been named as accused in the chargesheet, The Hindu reported, adding that the names of 12 others were also mentioned as having a role in the scam.
Of the nine persons who had been arrested in the case earlier and sent behind bars, six were out on bail.
The controversy in the case arose after Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu claimed that animal fat was used in preparing Tirupati laddus during the previous Y S Jagan Mohan Reddy-led regime in the state.
The YSR Congress Party then accused Naidu of indulging in "heinous allegations" for political gains while the ruling Telugu Desam Party in the state circulated a laboratory report to back its claim.
The Tirumala temple of Lord Venkateswara will remain closed to devotees from 9 am to 7.30 pm on March 3 owing to a lunar eclipse, the temple administration said.
According to a press release, the temple will reopen for devotees after the completion of 'suddhi', the purificatory rites performed to cleanse the temple after the eclipse, with offline darshan resuming at 8.30 pm.
"The temple will remain closed for over 10 hours and will reopen for devotees after the completion of purificatory rituals," it added.
The lunar eclipse is expected to last nearly three-and-a-half hours, from 3.20 pm to 6.47 pm.
"TTD said several sevas—including Ashtadala Pada Padmaradhana (worship of the Lord’s feet with eight-petaled lotus flowers), Kalyanotsavam (celestial wedding ceremony), Unjal (swing ceremony), Arjita Brahmotsavam (ceremonial procession) and Sahasra Deepalankara (lamp illumination ceremony)—will be cancelled due to the eclipse," the release said. ghee laddu prasadam adulteration substitution synthetic ghee chargesheet alleged Tirumala, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India laddu prasadam fflo:hasAdulterant synthetic ghee synthetic ghee, which was later allegedly used in the preparation of laddu prasadam synthetic ghee fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee supply synthetic ghee TTD laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba Dairy named Uttarakhand-based Bhole Baba Dairy for having connived TTD laddu ghee adulteration prov:used laddu prasadam used in the preparation of laddu prasadam synthetic ghee fflo:foundAt Tirumala temple management supplied to the Tirumala temple management supplying synthetic ghee fflo:hasFraudType Substitution supply synthetic ghee claim that animal fat was used in Tirupati laddus fflo:supportedBy laboratory report circulated a laboratory report to back its claim7f:T1380,Tirumala Ghee Adulteration Case: SIT completes probe, files final chargesheet thehansindia.com Tirupati: After an investigation spanning more than a year and stretching across a dozen states, the Special Investigation Team (SIT) submitted its final charge sheet in the Nellore ACB Court on Friday in the case involving the supply of spurious ghee allegedly used in making the Tirumala Srivari laddus.
The filing marks the culmination of a nearly 15-month probe that underwent a major transition midway. What began as a state-appointed SIT inquiry was later taken over by a five-member team led by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), following directions from the Supreme Court.  
In the run-up to the completion of the investigation, CBI joint director Veeresh Prabhu visited the SIT office in Tirupati earlier this month. During the visit, he conducted a detailed scrutiny of case records and held extensive deliberations with senior officers to evaluate investigative progress and the robustness of the legal evidence.  
The investigation eventually zeroed in on Uttarakhand-based Bhole Baba Organic Dairy as the hub of the alleged operation. The SIT identified the firm’s directors, Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain, as the principal architects of the conspiracy. According to investigators, the supply network extended through multiple firms and individuals across Andhra Pradesh and several other States.  
In the charge sheet filed on Friday, 36 individuals have been formally accused. It filed  the preliminary charge sheet in May 2025 accusing 24 persons. Later it filed a memo stating the role of 12 others. Significantly, TTD general manager Pralaya Kaveri Murali Krishna, the original complainant in the case, was also named as an accused. Among the accused, former TTD chairman Y V Subba Reddy’s PA Chinna Appanna’s name was also there.  
However, the names of several big personalities, who were questioned by the SIT during the investigation were not there in the charge sheet which gives speculation of filing supplementary charge sheets in due course.  
Initially, investigators believed the adulterated ghee originated in Tamil Nadu. However, deeper scrutiny of procurement trails and logistics exposed Uttarakhand as the primary source of the counterfeit product. The probe team comprised senior CBI officers supported by around 30 personnel from the state police.  
Officials examined procurement documents, laboratory test reports and financial records to reconstruct the supply chain. The inquiry focused on the sourcing of raw materials, payment flows linked to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD), and the manner in which the substandard ghee allegedly cleared procurement checks and reached Tirumala. Allegations of procedural violations and bribery were also part of the investigation.  
As per evidence placed before the court, Bhole Baba Organic Dairy and related entities are accused of supplying nearly 68 lakh kilograms of fake ghee between 2019 and 2024, with transactions estimated at around Rs 250 crore.   
Investigators said laboratory findings and procurement data showed that the product was manufactured using palm oil and hydrogenated fats, mixed with chemicals and additives to mimic the appearance and texture of pure ghee. It was also alleged that standard quality tests were tampered with to conceal the adulteration. ghee adulteration investigation pending_test Uttarakhand, India Tirumala Ghee Adulteration Act prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba Organic Dairy zeroed in on Uttarakhand-based Bhole Baba Organic Dairy as the hub of the alleged operation Tirumala Ghee Adulteration Act prov:used ghee case involving the supply of spurious ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant spurious substance supply of spurious ghee spurious ghee fflo:commonIn Andhra Pradesh supply network extended through multiple firms and individuals across Andhra Pradesh Tirumala Ghee Adulteration Incident fflo:foundIn ghee adulterated ghee originated in Tamil Nadu Tirumala Ghee Adulteration Incident fflo:inRegion Uttarakhand exposed Uttarakhand as the primary source of the counterfeit product Tirumala Ghee Adulteration Incident fflo:foundAtStep Tirumala substandard ghee allegedly cleared procurement checks and reached Tirumala Tirumala Ghee Adulteration Incident fflo:wasAttributedTo Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams payment flows linked to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams Ghee Adulteration Act prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Bhole Baba Organic Dairy and related entities are accused of supplying nearly 68 lakh kilograms of fake ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil product was manufactured using palm oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant hydrogenated fats product was manufactured using palm oil and hydrogenated fats ghee fflo:hasAdulterant chemicals mixed with chemicals and additives ghee fflo:hasAdulterant additives mixed with chemicals and additives Tampering with quality tests fflo:hasFraudType Masking tampered with to conceal the adulteration80:T7e1,CBI-led SIT files final charge-sheet in TTD ghee adulteration case thehindu.com The Special Investigation Team (SIT) formed under the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) has concluded its probe into the sensational ghee adulteration case that rocked the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) administration last year.
The SIT authorities submitted their final charge-sheet before the ACB Court in Nellore, marking a significant progress in the case that dragged on beyond one’s expectations, having taken several twists and turns over the last 15 months.
The charge-sheet named the Uttarakhand-based Bhole Baba Dairy of having connived with some employees of the TTD, as well as external dairy experts, in getting orders to supply synthetic (fake) ghee (that was later allegedly used in the preparation of laddu prasadam) to the tune of 68 lakh kg to the Tirumala temple management during 2021-2024, which was estimated to be worth ₹250 crore.
Twenty-four persons had been named as accused in the charge-sheet, while the names of 12 others were also mentioned as having a role in the scam. Of the nine persons who had been arrested and sent behind the bars, six were out on bail.
It may be recalled that the CBI-led SIT had been constituted under the directions of the Supreme Court.
Published - January 23, 2026 09:19 pm IST ghee adulteration substitution synthetic ghee charge-sheet filing alleged Tirumala, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India TTD ghee adulteration case prov:used ghee ghee adulteration case synthetic ghee fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee supply synthetic (fake) ghee synthetic ghee fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee supply synthetic (fake) ghee supply of synthetic ghee to TTD prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba Dairy Bhole Baba Dairy of having connived ... in getting orders to supply synthetic (fake) ghee supplying synthetic ghee fflo:hasFraudType Substitution supply synthetic (fake) ghee TTD ghee adulteration case fflo:triggeredAction charge-sheet filing SIT authorities submitted their final charge-sheet81:T781,SIT files charge sheet in Tirumala ghee case thehansindia.com The Special Investigation Team (SIT) has concluded its probe into the adulterated ghee supplied for the preparation of Tirumala Srivari laddus and has filed a charge sheet before the Nellore ACB court.
The investigation, which spanned 15 months across 12 states, identified organisations and individuals from Andhra Pradesh and 12 other states were involved in the case.
A total of 24 people have been named as accused in the charge sheet, while officials informed the court that another 12 individuals were also found to be involved.
The probe was initially conducted by a state-appointed SIT. However, following directions from the Supreme Court, a five-member special investigation team was constituted under the leadership of the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI). 
The investigation involved Deputy Superintendents of Police and Circle Inspectors from the CBI, supported by around 30 state officers. The team comprised JD Veeresh Prabhu of the CBI, Visakhapatnam DIG Murali Rambha, Guntur Range IG Sarvashrestha Tripathi, Visakhapatnam Range DIG Gopinath Jetty, and Dr Satyendra Kumar Panda of the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI).
Tirupati Additional Superintendent of Police Venkat Rao was appointed investigating officer by the CBI Director and played a key role in the inquiry. He prepared detailed questionnaires and interrogated the accused in line with instructions from senior officials of the central investigating agency. ghee adulteration charge sheet filing pending_test India, Tirumala Tirumala Srivari laddus fkg:hasIngredient ghee ghee supplied for the preparation of Tirumala Srivari laddus ghee fflo:hasAdulterant adulterated substance adulterated ghee supplied for the preparation of Tirumala Srivari laddus Tirumala ghee case fflo:triggeredAction charge sheet filing SIT files charge sheet in Tirumala ghee case82:Tda1,Tirumala laddu ghee case enters final stage! thehansindia.com Tirupati: After more than a year of investigation into the alleged mixing of substandard ghee in the famed Tirumala laddu prasadam, the probe is nearing its conclusion, with officials preparing to take the next major legal step. Sources indicate that a supplementary charge sheet is expected to be filed later this month, marking a crucial point in the high-profile case.
The Special Investigation Team (SIT), led by the Central Bureau of Investigation, has largely wrapped up its core investigative work. Evidence collection, witness examinations and verification of records have already been completed. Officials are now focused on final legal checks and paperwork before moving the court. The supplementary charge sheet is likely to be submitted in the Nellore ACB Court, possibly within a fortnight.  
Signalling the seriousness of the final phase, CBI joint director Veeresh Prabhu visited the SIT office in Tirupati a couple of days back. This was his first visit since the case was registered.  
During the visit, he reviewed case files in detail and held a long meeting with senior officers to assess the progress of the investigation and the strength of the legal documentation. Senior police officials from Guntur and Visakhapatnam ranges, along with experts linked to food safety regulation, were present during the discussions.  
So far, the SIT has identified 36 accused in the case. While several have already been taken into custody, others were questioned after being served notices. Investigators believe that certain officials associated with the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams, along with dairy specialists, were instrumental in approving the supply of the allegedly adulterated ghee. In a recent development, the Nellore ACB Court rejected the anticipatory bail plea of Vijayabhaskar Reddy, listed as the 34th accused, backing the prosecution’s submissions.  
Officials say the investigation is not entirely closed yet, as the SIT is still weighing the possibility of arresting a few more key suspects. Once these steps are completed, a comprehensive charge sheet will be filed. Following this, a detailed status report on the entire investigation is expected to be submitted to the Supreme Court in a sealed cover.  
It was learnt that the SIT has also been carefully examining the legal ramifications arising from the arrest of the complainant, who was then the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams General Manager (Procurement), Murali Krishna, after he was named as an accused in the case.  
Sources said the CBI leadership has underlined the importance of avoiding procedural errors and ensuring the case can withstand close judicial scrutiny. If everything proceeds as planned, the remaining formalities are expected to be completed within the next 15 to 20 days, bringing the long-running probe close to its end. ghee laddu adulteration substandard ghee investigation rejection of anticipatory bail alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India Tirumala laddu fflo:hasAdulterant substandard ghee alleged mixing of substandard ghee in the famed Tirumala laddu prasadam rejection of anticipatory bail for Vijayabhaskar Reddy fflo:issuedBy Nellore ACB Court Nellore ACB Court rejected the anticipatory bail plea of Vijayabhaskar Reddy Tirumala laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith dairy specialists dairy specialists, were instrumental in approving the supply of the allegedly adulterated ghee83:Tb37,SIT to File Charge Sheet in Laddu Ghee Case Soon deccanchronicle.com CBI joint director S Veeresh Prabhu visited the SIT office in Tirupati last week and held a meeting with SIT officers.
Tirupati: The CBI’s Special Investigation Team probing the alleged ghee adulteration in the Tirumala laddu prasadam is likely to file a second charge sheet by the end of January.
The investigation, which has been underway for over a year, has reached its final stage with key processes such as collection of evidence, recording of statements and scrutiny of documents having largely been completed. Sources said SIT is currently engaged in final legal vetting and documentation work. It would file the supplementary charge sheet in the Nellore ACB Court in the next two weeks.
CBI joint director S Veeresh Prabhu visited the SIT office in Tirupati last week and held a meeting with SIT officers. He examined the progress of the probe and the case files. The meeting was attended by Guntur Range IG Sarvashresth Tripathi, Visakhapatnam Range DIG Gopinath Jatti, DIG Murali Ramba and Food Safety and Standards Authority of India adviser Satyen Kumar Panda, among others.
The SIT has so far named 36 accused in the case. Several of them have been arrested, while others were issued notices and questioned in custody.
The investigation found that some TTD officials and dairy experts conspired in granting approvals for supply of adulterated ghee. Recently, the anticipatory bail petition filed by dairy expert Vijayabhaskar Reddy, listed as A-34 in the case, was dismissed by the Nellore ACB court after it agreed with the arguments presented by the prosecution.
With the case entering a decisive phase, the SIT is also learnt to be considering the arrest of a few individuals. Officials said a comprehensive charge sheet would be filed after these steps, following which a detailed report on the investigation would be submitted to the Supreme Court in a sealed cover.
Sources said the CBI joint director stressed the need to ensure there were no legal lapses and that the case stands firm in court. ghee adulteration filing of charge sheet pending_test India, Tirupati ghee adulteration incident prov:wasAttributedTo Vijayabhaskar Reddy dairy expert Vijayabhaskar Reddy, listed as A-34 in the case ghee adulteration incident fflo:foundIn ghee supply of adulterated ghee ghee adulteration incident fflo:triggeredAction filing of charge sheet comprehensive charge sheet would be filed ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith TTD officials TTD officials and dairy experts conspired in granting approvals for supply of adulterated ghee ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith dairy experts TTD officials and dairy experts conspired in granting approvals for supply of adulterated ghee ghee adulteration method fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional conspired in granting approvals84:T131a,The Vitamin D trap: How âfortifiedâ oil poisoned Punjab homes indiatimes.com Chandigarh: A medical investigation spanning the states of Punjab and Kolkata finally uncovered the source of a toxic "fortified" oil that left several residents of Punjab in critical condition.
Months after TOI reported cases in PGI where several patients with severe Vitamin D toxicity were admitted, health officials in Rajpura, Patiala, traced the fraudulent supply chain back to Kolkata.
The alarm was first raised when six residents of Rajpura, including two children, were rushed to PGI's emergency wing. The patients presented with alarming symptoms, including persistent vomiting, extreme weakness, and an altered sensorium—a state of clouded consciousness. Diagnostic tests at the institute revealed life-threatening levels of Vitamin D, a condition known as Hypervitaminosis D, which led to severe hypercalcemia (excess calcium in the blood) and acute kidney distress.
Subsequent investigation by the Punjab health department and food safety wing exposed a sophisticated web of local-level adulteration and branding fraud. According to officials, the perpetrators utilised raw oil from reputed brands but tampered with the product before it reached consumers.
In a deceptive "mixing" operation concentrated in Fatehgarh Sahib and Rajpura, distributors allegedly opened original packages and infused the oil with excessive, toxic concentrations of Vitamin D. 
"This adulterated mixture was then refilled in loose bottles and sold under a local brand name. To gain public trust, the bottles carried fraudulent labels claiming the oil was ‘Fortified for bone health' and falsely bore the FSSAI approval mark," said Dr Gurpreet Kaur, district health officer, Patiala.
The DHO confirmed that the food safety wing moved to file a formal court case against the perpetrators. The crackdown followed results from the state food lab in Kharar, which officially declared the seized samples as substandard and hazardous. In earlier raids, officials had already confiscated over 350 boxes and hundreds of bottles of the suspect oil.
"We have initiated public announcements across villages near Rajpura, advising residents to immediately cease the consumption of this oil," Dr Kaur said. 
Dr Divjot Singh, district epidemiologist, confirmed that while a survey was conducted in villages, the retail shopkeeper involved has since closed his shop. 
Patients in distress, officials on toes
Six Rajpura residents, including two children, landed in PGI with severe Vitamin D toxicity
Patients showed persistent vomiting, extreme weakness and altered sensorium; tests revealed life-threatening hypercalcemia and acute kidney distress
Punjab health and food safety teams traced the source to adulterated "fortified" oil tampered at local mixing units
Raw oil from reputed brands was allegedly opened, infused with excessive Vitamin D, and repackaged under a fake local brand
Bottles carried fraudulent labels, including false FSSAI approval marks, to win consumer trust
State food lab in Kharar declared seized samples substandard and hazardous
Over 350 boxes and hundreds of bottles had been seized in earlier raids
Food safety wing has initiated court proceedings against the accused
Public advisories issued across Rajpura-area villages to stop usage of the oil immediately
Retail shopkeeper involved has shut his shop following investigations
MSID:: 126143805 413 | edible oil adulteration substandard mislabeling Vitamin D court proceedings public advisories raids lab_confirmed Rajpura, Patiala, Punjab, India oil fflo:hasAdulterant Vitamin D infused the oil with excessive, toxic concentrations of Vitamin D Vitamin D fflo:causesEffect Hypervitaminosis D life-threatening levels of Vitamin D, a condition known as Hypervitaminosis D severe Vitamin D toxicity fflo:affectsPopulation children Six Rajpura residents, including two children, landed in PGI with severe Vitamin D toxicity court proceedings fflo:issuedBy Food safety wing Food safety wing has initiated court proceedings Hypervitaminosis D fflo:causesEffect hypercalcemia led to severe hypercalcemia Hypervitaminosis D fflo:causesEffect acute kidney distress and acute kidney distress Vitamin D fflo:commonIn Punjab poisoned Punjab homes Hypervitaminosis D fflo:hasEffectType fflo:AcuteEffect severe Vitamin D toxicity Vitamin D fflo:causesEffect acute kidney distress acute kidney distress Vitamin D fflo:causesEffect persistent vomiting persistent vomiting Vitamin D fflo:causesEffect extreme weakness extreme weakness fortified oil fflo:hasAdulterant Vitamin D infused with excessive Vitamin D oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod mixing operation tampered at local mixing units mixing operation fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling Bottles carried fraudulent labels IncidentFinding: oil substandard fflo:foundIn oil declared seized samples substandard85:Tf67,Fake ghee making unit busted in Jaipur, 4 held | Jaipur News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Jaipur: City police Sunday busted a large-scale fake ghee manufacturing unit operating from Sarna Dungar and seized around 7,500 litre of spurious ghee, arresting four persons involved in the racket. 
The counterfeit product was being packed and sold under the labels of well-known dairy brands, including Saras, Amul, Lotus, Krishna, and Mahan, police said.
Deputy commissioner of police (West) Hanuman Prasad said the factory was preparing fake ghee by mixing essence with vegetable and refined soybean oil, which was then packed in 15kg tins, 1kg, and 500-gram containers bearing forged brand labels. Police also recovered around 10 drums of raw material used for manufacturing the fake product.
The raid followed specific input received by the District Special Branch. A joint team comprising police officials, food safety officers, and quality control representatives from Saras Dairy conducted the inspection at the factory located in Balaji Vihar-A, Mansharampur area of Sarna Dungar. During the search, officials found about 6,000 wrappers of branded ghee packets, electronic cutters, sealing machines, plastic rolls for packing, Agmark replicas, and other packaging material.
 Four men were found working inside the unit at the time of the raid.
The arrested accused have been identified as Rajendra Kumar Gupta (55) of Mathura, Anil Joshi (29) of Gwalior, Bhupendra alias Rupendra Sharma (30) of Gwalior, and Jagdish Sharma (44) of Churu, all currently residing in Jaipur. Police said a fifth accused, identified as Virendra Sharma, is absconding and efforts are on to trace him.
During questioning, the accused admitted they produced nearly 2,000 litres of fake ghee daily, supplying it to local markets by loading vehicles inside the factory to avoid suspicion. Waste material and wrappers were allegedly burnt in a furnace within the premises to destroy evidence.
On a complaint filed by Saras Dairy's quality control officer, a case was registered under relevant sections of theBNS, Copyright Act, and Trade Marks Act. Further investigation is underway to trace the supply chain and identify distributors involved in the racket. ghee adulteration seizure recall_triggered India, Jaipur fake ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable oil the factory was preparing fake ghee by mixing essence with vegetable and refined soybean oil fake ghee fflo:hasAdulterant refined soybean oil the factory was preparing fake ghee by mixing essence with vegetable and refined soybean oil fake ghee fflo:hasAdulterant essence the factory was preparing fake ghee by mixing essence with vegetable and refined soybean oil fake ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod mixing essence with vegetable and refined soybean oil preparing fake ghee by mixing essence with vegetable and refined soybean oil mixing essence with vegetable and refined soybean oil fflo:hasFraudType Substitution preparing fake ghee by mixing essence with vegetable and refined soybean oil fake ghee fflo:foundAt Processing busted a large-scale fake ghee manufacturing unit fake ghee fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy fake ghee manufacturing unit fake ghee production prov:wasAssociatedWith Rajendra Kumar Gupta accused admitted they produced nearly 2,000 litres of fake ghee daily fake ghee production prov:wasAssociatedWith Anil Joshi accused admitted they produced nearly 2,000 litres of fake ghee daily fake ghee production prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhupendra alias Rupendra Sharma accused admitted they produced nearly 2,000 litres of fake ghee daily fake ghee production prov:wasAssociatedWith Virendra Sharma a fifth accused, identified as Virendra Sharma, is absconding fake ghee production prov:used ghee produced nearly 2,000 litres of fake ghee daily supply to local markets prov:wasInfluencedBy fake ghee production produced nearly 2,000 litres of fake ghee daily, supplying it to local markets86:Te06,SIT set to file chargesheet in ghee adulteration case in Andhra newindianexpress.com TIRUPATI: The Supreme Court-appointed CBI-led joint Special Investigation Team (SIT) has intensified efforts to finalise the chargesheet in the Tirumala Srivari laddu ghee adulteration case and is likely to file it shortly before the Nellore ACB Court, sources said.
Technical and legal teams are working round the clock to complete documentation within the next five days, as the probe reaches a crucial stage. The deadline fixed by the SC concluded on December 15.
After filing the chargesheet, the SIT will submit a midterm status report to the Supreme Court detailing the progress of the investigation. Sources said drafting and compilation of evidence have been underway since the probe began, with investigators consolidating financial and confession-based inputs.
“It may be recalled that the first five accused in the case are private dairy owners and directors, who allegedly played a central role in supplying adulterated ghee to the TTD. Among them, Raju Rajasekharan (A-2), Apoorva Vinay Kant Chawda (A-3), Vipin Jain (A-4), Pomil Jain (A-5) have been identified as key private dairy operators.”
So far, the SIT has arrested 36 accused in connection with the case. Of them, three remain in judicial custody without bail. Several private dairy owners arrested earlier secured conditional bail and are attending the SIT inquiry as required.
The investigation led to the arrest of senior TTD officials, including two former General Managers from the Procurement and Marketing wings, along with other staff members. Some of them are currently lodged in Nellore Central Jail under judicial remand.
Key accused former TTD Chairman aide Chinna Appanna and another prime accused Ajay Kumar Suigandh continue to remain in Nellore Central Jail, with courts yet to grant them bail. Chinna Appanna recently approached the AP HC seeking bail, and the matter has been adjourned for further hearing.
The probe gathered pace over the past month with the arrest of several crucial accused. Notably, the SIT arrested a serving TTD officer for the first time — RSSVR Subramanyam (A-29), former General Manager (Procurement and Marketing), who is working as EE-1 in TTD.
SIT findings pointed to serious lapses in the ghee quality verification process, with private dairy units allegedly flouting TTD norms.
The SIT submitted a detailed written explanation on inspection failures and how adulterated ghee entered the supply chain. Investigators said confession statements of arrested accused revealed a nexus between certain TTD dairy experts and private dairy owners, strengthening the case for filing a chargesheet. ghee adulteration adulterated ghee chargesheet filing alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee adulteration prov:used ghee Tirumala Srivari laddu ghee adulteration case adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt supply chain adulterated ghee entered the supply chain ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Pomil Jain Pomil Jain (A-5) have been identified as key private dairy operators ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith private dairy owners private dairy owners and directors, who allegedly played a central role in supplying adulterated ghee ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Chinna Appanna Key accused former TTD Chairman aide Chinna Appanna ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Ajay Kumar Suigandh another prime accused Ajay Kumar Suigandh TTD dairy experts prov:wasAssociatedWith private dairy owners nexus between certain TTD dairy experts and private dairy owners87:T77f,Laddu ghee case: HC dismisses bail plea of former TTD chairmanâ_x0080__x0099_s PA | Vijayawada News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Vijayawada: AP high court on Monday dismissed the bail petition filed by K Chinnappanna, personal assistant to former TTD chairman Y V Subba Reddy, in the alleged laddu ghee adulteration case. Chinnappanna is one of the accused in the case, and has been charged with collection of commissions from adulterated ghee suppliers.
Chinnappanna moved the high court seeking regular bail in the case, claiming that he had no role to play in ghee procurement. Senior counsel C Nageswara Rao argued that the allegation against him was that of collecting commissions from suppliers but not being involved in the alleged adulteration. As police custody of the petitioner was completed and the main accused in the case, the adulterated ghee suppliers, have already obtained bail, Rao pleaded to grant bail to Chinnappanna.
PSP Suresh Kumar, the standing counsel for the CBI which is leading the special investigation team (SIT) constituted by the Supreme Court, said Chinnappanna collected Rs 25 per kg of adulterated ghee supplied by Bolebaba and other dairies and had knowledge about the supply of adulterated ghee. 
Suresh Kumar further stated that Chinnappanna used hawala channels to route the money and is suspected to have purchased 14 plots in Visakhapatnam with the crime proceeds.
As the investigation is still ongoing to unearth the complete money trail and the matter is connected with serious financial crime, he should not be granted bail at this stage, argued Suresh Kumar. Justice Y Lakshmana Rao, after hearing both sides, had reserved orders. He delivered the judgment on Monday, rejecting Chinnappanna's bail plea. ghee adulteration bail plea dismissed alleged Vijayawada, Andhra Pradesh, India Laddu ghee adulteration case prov:used ghee alleged laddu ghee adulteration case88:Tc37,Indore News: 3 Dairy Licences Suspended In Ghee Adulteration Crackdown freepressjournal.in Indore (Madhya Pradesh): In a decisive move against food adulteration, district administration and Food and Drug Administration (FDA) suspended three dairy licences after detecting largescale irregularities in ghee manufacturing and sale in Indore. Officials said once investigation is completed, case will be filed before competent court.
Action followed inspection at Palda-based Shri Ram Milk Food & Dairy Industries and two other firms functioning from same premises under separate licences. FDA teams collected 10 ghee samples of different brands and pack sizes and seized 3,409 litres of ghee valued at nearly Rs 20 lakh.
Laboratory analysis later found seven samples substandard, failing on almost five key quality parameters. Products that failed tests included multiple variants of SRMI Mother Choice, SRMI Milk Cream and loose ghee, all packed by same group.
Probe revealed that three licence-holding firms were in fact operating as a single unit. Common entry and exit points, machinery and storage facilities were shared, despite claims of separate operations. Investigators also found that all financial transactions were controlled by Narendra Kumar Gupta. One firm listed another individual as proprietor, but no supporting GST or banking trail was found, raising doubts over licence authenticity.
Officials said seriousness of case was compounded by group’s past record. Brand has earlier faced convictions in Indore, Dewas, Dhar and Harda, while multiple cases remain pending in Ujjain, Mandsaur and Rajasthan. Considering repeated violations and risk to public health, FDA suspended all three licences with immediate effect.
Authorities confirmed that complete case file will be placed before competent court after probe is finalised.
In a parallel action, FDA teams raided Shyam Marketing at GadiAdda after ghee was found being sold at an unusually low rate of Rs 270 per kg. Suspecting adulteration, 74 kg of ghee was seized and four samples were drawn for laboratory testing.
Meanwhile, inspection at Parv Food & Productions in Palhar Nagar exposed unhygienic conditions in manufacture and storage of gajak and chikki. Samples were collected and a notice issued, warning that failure to rectify shortcomings within stipulated period would lead to suspension of unit’s registration. ghee adulteration suspension of three dairy licences pending_test Indore (, Madhya Pradesh, India, Indore (Madhya Pradesh) suspension of three dairy licences fflo:targets ghee suspended three dairy licences after detecting largescale irregularities in ghee ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Shri Ram Milk Food & Dairy Industries irregularities in ghee manufacturing and sale in Indore ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Narendra Kumar Gupta all financial transactions were controlled by Narendra Kumar Gupta laboratory analysis fso:isPerformedOn ghee sample Laboratory analysis later found seven samples substandard ghee fflo:hasAdulterant unknown adulterant Suspecting adulteration, 74 kg of ghee was seized89:T521,TTD laddu ghee scam: Order on Chinnappa bail slated for December 16 newindianexpress.com VIJAYAWADA: The Andhra Pradesh High Court on Friday reserved judgment on the bail petition filed by Chinnappa, former PA to ex-TTD Chairman Subba Reddy, in the alleged fake ghee supply scam linked to the preparation of laddu prasadam at Justice Y Lakshmana Rao said the order would be delivered on December 16.
Arguing for the petitioner, senior advocate C Nageswara Rao said Chinnappa had no role in the supply of adulterated ghee and was being falsely implicated. He said allegations that the petitioner received commissions from dairy suppliers were baseless.
He pointed out that all owners of the dairies accused of supplying adulterated ghee had already been granted bail.
Opposing the plea, CBI standing counsel PSP Suresh Kumar argued that the investigation revealed Chinnappa demanded a commission of `25 per kg of ghee supplied.
He also claimed the petitioner received illegal money through hawala channels. ghee adulteration fake ghee bail petition alleged Vijayawada, Andhra Pradesh, India fake ghee supply scam prov:used ghee fake ghee supply scam linked to the preparation of laddu prasadam fake ghee supply scam prov:wasAssociatedWith dairy suppliers owners of the dairies accused of supplying adulterated ghee8a:T94a,Man held for selling adulterated ghee in Secunderabad thehindu.com Acting on credible information, the Commissioner’s Task Force (North Zone), along with Market police, apprehended a man for allegedly manufacturing and selling adulterated ghee in the Second Bazar area of Secunderabad on Saturday (December 13).
The accused, Annamali Sainathan, 68, was taken into custody during a raid at his residence. Police said he was formerly running a tiffin centre near Monda Market and had turned to the illegal activity after discontinuing the business due to financial difficulties.
Investigators said that the accused was preparing spurious ghee at his residence by mixing plant based oils including coconut oil, palm oil and vegetable oil, along with food colours, and sold it as cow ghee. The product was packed in one litre poly packs and was supplied to local markets and pooja stores at ₹600 per kilogram, falsely claiming to be genuine.
Police seized around 200 kg adulterated ghee, a weighing machine, a packing machine, packing covers and a mobile phone, all valued at about ₹1.5 lakh. Officials said that the activity posed a risk to public health and amounted to cheating consumers for unlawful gain. Legal action is being initiated under relevant provisions of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita (BNS) Act.
Published - December 13, 2025 08:06 pm IST ghee adulteration seizure alleged India, Secunderabad manufacturing and selling adulterated ghee prov:used ghee manufacturing and selling adulterated ghee manufacturing and selling adulterated ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith Annamali Sainathan apprehended a man for allegedly manufacturing and selling adulterated ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant coconut oil mixing plant based oils including coconut oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil mixing plant based oils including coconut oil, palm oil and vegetable oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable oil mixing plant based oils including coconut oil, palm oil and vegetable oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant food colours along with food colours coconut oil fflo:isSubstituteFor cow ghee mixing plant based oils including coconut oil ... and sold it as cow ghee palm oil fflo:isSubstituteFor cow ghee mixing plant based oils including coconut oil, palm oil and vegetable oil vegetable oil fflo:isSubstituteFor cow ghee mixing plant based oils including coconut oil, palm oil and vegetable oil8b:T10ca,'Mindset Shaped By Appeasement Politics...': AP Deputy CM Pawan Kalyan Hits Out At TN CM Stalin On Tirupati Laddoo-Ghee Case freepressjournal.in Amravati: Andhra Pradesh Deputy Chief Minister Pawan Kalyan criticised Tamil Nadu Chief Minister MK Stalin over his remarks on the Tirumala adulterated laddoo-ghee scam, asserting that protections provided to minority communities should be applied equally to Hindus and must be upheld irrespective of religion or faith.
While speaking to reporters on Wednesday, the Andhra Pradesh Deputy Chief Minister said, "If the Hindu majority is a truth in this nation, then such instances will not happen in this country...One of the MPs' comments, I feel, comes from a mindset shaped by appeasement politics...If certain provisions are applied to protect Muslim or Christian interests, then the same should apply to Hindus as well...."
Meanwhile, the Special Investigation Team (SIT) probing the Tirumala adulterated ghee case took into custody two Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) officials on Tuesday.
According to officials, medical examinations related to the case are being conducted at Tirupati's Ruia Hospital.
The two apprehended officials were identified as Sugandh and Subrahmanyam. The SIT stated it would interrogate them until December 12 as part of the ongoing probe.
Earlier, on November 28, the SIT, functioning under the supervision of the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), arrested a senior official from the TTD engineering department in connection with the TTD laddu-ghee adulteration case, an SIT official said.
Guntur Range I G Sarvasresti Tripathi said that the arrested person, RSSVR Subrahmanyam, had previously served as the General Manager (Procurement) at TTD and was responsible for procuring key materials, including the ghee used to prepare laddus.
On September 26, the Supreme Court stayed the Andhra Pradesh High Court order, which observed that the CBI Director had violated the apex court's directions by appointing an officer outside the SIT to probe allegations of adulterated ghee used in the preparation of the famed TTD laddu prasadam.
On June 6, TTD initiated legal action against multiple unauthorised entities found selling or promoting products under the "Tirupati Laddu" name in violation of its registered Geographical Indication (GI), TDP said in a press release.
Legal notices were served through Sahadeva Law Chambers to several online platforms and vendors, including PushMyCart (Mahita LLC) and Transact Foods Limited, for unauthorised commercial exploitation of the Tirupati Laddu name and falsely associating their offerings with the temple.
Earlier in February 2025, the Special Investigation Team (SIT) led by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) arrested four individuals and sent them to judicial remand in connection with the adulteration of ghee used in the Tirumala Srivari Laddu, the agency reported finding "severe lapses" in the e-tendering process of the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD).
The CBI, acting on orders from the Supreme Court, had formed an SIT to investigate the matter. The remand report confirmed adulteration in the supplied ghee, and, according to the investigating agency, AR Dairy, Vaishnavi Dairy, and Bhole Baba Dairy were involved in the case.
(Except for the headline, this article has not been edited by FPJ's editorial team and auto-generated from an agency feed.) ghee adulteration unknown arrest custody legal action alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India Tirumala Srivari Laddu fkg:hasIngredient ghee adulteration of ghee used in the Tirumala Srivari Laddu Tirupati Laddoo fflo:hasAdulterant Adulterated Ghee Tirumala adulterated ghee case TTD laddu-ghee adulteration case prov:used ghee responsible for procuring key materials, including the ghee used to prepare laddus TTD laddu-ghee adulteration case prov:used laddu ghee used to prepare laddus Tirupati Laddu fflo:belongsToCategory Geographical Indication violation of its registered Geographical Indication (GI) ghee adulteration in Tirumala Srivari Laddu prov:wasAssociatedWith AR Dairy AR Dairy, Vaishnavi Dairy, and Bhole Baba Dairy were involved in the case Tirumala Srivari Laddu ghee adulteration finding fflo:foundIn ghee remand report confirmed adulteration in the supplied ghee8c:T1192,Pawan Kalyan criticises MK Stalin as SIT makes new arrests in Tirumala laddu-ghee scam thehindubusinessline.com Andhra Pradesh Deputy Chief Minister Pawan Kalyan criticised Tamil Nadu Chief Minister MK Stalin over his remarks on the Tirumala adulterated laddoo-ghee scam, asserting that protections provided to minority communities should be applied equally to Hindus and must be upheld irrespective of religion or faith.
While speaking to reporters on Wednesday, the Andhra Pradesh Deputy Chief Minister said, "If the Hindu majority is a truth in this nation, then such instances will not happen in this country...One of the MPs' comments, I feel, comes from a mindset shaped by appeasement politics...If certain provisions are applied to protect Muslim or Christian interests, then the same should apply to Hindus as well...."Meanwhile, the Special Investigation Team (SIT) probing the Tirumala adulterated ghee case took into custody two Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) officials on Tuesday.
According to officials, medical examinations related to the case are being conducted at Tirupati's Ruia Hospital.
The two apprehended officials were identified as Sugandh and Subrahmanyam. The SIT stated it would interrogate them until December 12 as part of the ongoing probe.
Earlier, on November 28, the SIT, functioning under the supervision of the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), arrested a senior official from the TTD engineering department in connection with the TTD laddu-ghee adulteration case, an SIT official said.
Guntur Range I G Sarvasresti Tripathi said that the arrested person, RSSVR Subrahmanyam, had previously served as the General Manager (Procurement) at TTD and was responsible for procuring key materials, including the ghee used to prepare laddus.
On September 26, the Supreme Court stayed the Andhra Pradesh High Court order, which observed that the CBI Director had violated the apex court's directions by appointing an officer outside the SIT to probe allegations of adulterated ghee used in the preparation of the famed TTD laddu prasadam.
On June 6, TTD initiated legal action against multiple unauthorised entities found selling or promoting products under the "Tirupati Laddu" name in violation of its registered Geographical Indication (GI), TDP said in a press release.
Legal notices were served through Sahadeva Law Chambers to several online platforms and vendors, including PushMyCart (Mahita LLC) and Transact Foods Limited, for unauthorised commercial exploitation of the Tirupati Laddu name and falsely associating their offerings with the temple.
Earlier in February 2025, the Special Investigation Team (SIT) led by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) arrested four individuals and sent them to judicial remand in connection with the adulteration of ghee used in the Tirumala Srivari Laddu, the agency reported finding "severe lapses" in the e-tendering process of the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD).
The CBI, acting on orders from the Supreme Court, had formed an SIT to investigate the matter. The remand report confirmed adulteration in the supplied ghee, and, according to the investigating agency, AR Dairy, Vaishnavi Dairy, and Bhole Baba Dairy were involved in the case.
Published on December 11, 2025 ghee adulteration arrest custody alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India Tirumala laddu-ghee scam prov:used ghee Tirumala adulterated laddoo-ghee scam Tirumala laddu-ghee scam prov:used laddu Tirumala adulterated laddoo-ghee scam Tirumala adulterated ghee case prov:wasAssociatedWith Sugandh SIT probing the Tirumala adulterated ghee case took into custody... Sugandh Tirumala adulterated ghee case prov:wasAssociatedWith Subrahmanyam SIT probing the Tirumala adulterated ghee case took into custody... Subrahmanyam TTD laddu-ghee adulteration case prov:used ghee responsible for procuring key materials, including the ghee used to prepare laddus TTD laddu-ghee adulteration case prov:used laddu ghee used to prepare laddus Tirupati Laddu fflo:hasDefinition registered Geographical Indication (GI) violation of its registered Geographical Indication (GI) TTD fflo:triggeredAction Legal action against unauthorised entities TTD initiated legal action against multiple unauthorised entities ghee adulteration in Tirumala Srivari Laddu prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba Dairy Bhole Baba Dairy were involved in the case ghee adulteration finding fflo:foundIn ghee remand report confirmed adulteration in the supplied ghee8d:Tc68,Tirumala Shocker: Rs 54 Crore Silk Dupatta Scam Uncovered After Fake Ghee Row and Donation Box Theft newsx.com The vigilance officials have unearthed a new scam at Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam, this time finding an inconsistency in acquiring the silk dupattas for a decade-long period. The dupattas were believed to be pure mulberry silk but turned out to be polyester.
The scam came to light after TTD Chairman BR Naidu ordered a check to see whether the dupattas met the quality standards set in the tenders. These dupattas were presented to dignitaries and donors as part of the tradition. The scam is estimated to have incurred a loss of around Rs 54 crores.
The Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam has previously been in the news for controversies about the adulterated laddus and the Parakamani case.
The tenders regarding the quality of silk dupattas have clearly stated that the dupattas must be made of pure mulberry silk and must use 20/22 denier yarn along with a minimum resultant count of 31.5 denier. The tender further clarifies the dimensions of the dupatta with clear instructions about the display of the temple symbols on the dupatta.
The officials stated that the contractor supplied 15,000 dupattas priced at Rs 1,389 per piece.
According to reports, TTD Chairman BR Naidu said, “We have come to know that there were a few discrepancies in the purchasing department. Taking note of this, we have handed over the investigation to the ACB.” The vigilance committee sent samples for testing to two different laboratories, where it was confirmed that the dupattas were made of 100% polyester.
Tirumala receives another whammy after the laddu controversy and the donation box theft
Also Read: Tirupati Temple Laddu Scam: Rs 250 Crore Worth Of Adulterated Ghee Fed To Devotees Over 5 years
The laddu scandal of Tirupatti came to light in September 2024 after TDP came to power, and CM Chandrababu Naidu revealed the reports that alleged that adulterated ghee was used in laddus instead of cow ghee. An SIT was constituted, which revealed that between 2019 and 2024, around 20 crore laddus were made with adulterated ghee. During this period, Rs 250 crores were paid by the then TTD board to various suppliers.
The donation box theft case, also known as the Parakamani case, broke out on April 29, 2023, when a clerk, CV Ravi Kumar, was caught stealing from the “Srivari Hundi” donation box at a temple-associated monastery.
Khalid Qasid is a media enthusiast with a strong interest in documentary filmmaking. He holds a Master’s degree in Convergent Journalism from AJK MCRC. He has also written extensively on esports at Sportsdunia. Currently, he covers world and general news at NewsX Digital. ghee adulteration substitution adulterated ghee investigation alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India laddu fflo:hasAdulterant adulterated ghee alleged that adulterated ghee was used in laddus adulterated ghee fflo:isSubstituteFor cow ghee adulterated ghee was used in laddus instead of cow ghee substitution of polyester for mulberry silk fflo:hasFraudType Substitution dupattas were believed to be pure mulberry silk but turned out to be polyester8e:T684,SIT grills two accused in ghee case in  Tirumala laddu ghee adulteration case newindianexpress.com TIRUPATI: The SC-appointed CBI-led Special Investigation Team (SIT) intensified its probe into the Tirumala laddu ghee adulteration case on Tuesday by simultaneously interrogating two key accused for the first time.
The SIT questioned Ajay Kumar Sugandh (A-16), a Delhi-based trader, and RSSV Subramanyam (A-29), former TTD General Manager.
Both were taken for medical tests at Ruia Hospital before being shifted to the SIT camp office and later handed over to Tirupati East Police at 5 pm.
The SIT examined the alleged nexus between private dairies and trader Ajay Kumar Sugandh, with the questioning of RSSV Subramanyam considered crucial to uncover policy decisions made during the period.
Investigators used a detailed questionnaire to trace the conspiracy behind adulterated ghee supplied for laddu production, aiming to establish links between suppliers, intermediaries and officials.
Sources said at least two more influential individuals may be added to the chargesheet, expected by month-end. ghee adulteration interrogation alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India Tirumala laddu ghee adulteration prov:used ghee Tirumala laddu ghee adulteration case Tirumala laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith RSSV Subramanyam questioning of RSSV Subramanyam considered crucial to uncover policy decisions Tirumala laddu ghee adulteration prov:used ghee adulterated ghee supplied for laddu production Tirumala laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith private dairies examined the alleged nexus between private dairies and trader Ajay Kumar Sugandh8f:T1241,Tirumala now hit by  ₹54 crore silk shawl scam after adulterated ghee and donation rows hindustantimes.com Tirumala now hit by ₹54 crore silk shawl scam after adulterated ghee and donation rows
TTD has sought an Anti-Corruption Bureau (ACB) probe into a major shawl procurement scandal.
A fresh scam has hit the Tirupati temple, this time involving silk. The Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD), the trust that manages Andhra Pradesh's Lord Venkateshwara shrine, has sought an Anti-Corruption Bureau (ACB) probe into a major shawl procurement scandal.
According to the TTD, a vendor supplied polyester dupattas worth over ₹54 crore in place of silk ones for years, an official said on Wednesday. The silk shawls are traditionally used during the ‘aashirvachan’ (blessing) ritual at the Tirumala temple, PTI news agency reported.
“Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams has requested the Andhra Pradesh government to initiate an Anti-Corruption Bureau probe against a fabric vendor for supplying over ₹54 crore worth polyester shawls instead of silken ones used in 'aashirvachan' rituals,” the news agency quoted a TTD official.
The irregularity surfaced after officials noticed that the material being supplied did not resemble silk. This prompted a closer examination of recent consignments.
Lab tests confirm shawls were substandard
The TTD ordered laboratory tests on fabric samples, conducted in Dharmavaram in Sri Satya Sai district and in Bengaluru, the report added. The results were clear: the shawls failed tender specifications and were nowhere close to the silk quality mandated in the contract.
An internal vigilance inquiry followed in November. A detailed report was then submitted to the TTD board, outlining how the vendor allegedly passed off inferior polyester fabric as silk over an extended period.
The vigilance wing also examined the supplier’s financial transactions and forwarded its findings to the board. The ACB is now expected to independently verify these details.
Earlier scams
The shawl scam comes on the heels of two other major controversies involving the country’s richest Hindu shrine, which is the custodian of the Sri Venkateswara Swamy temple.
In September last year, the TTD had filed a police complaint against a Tamil Nadu-based dairy company for allegedly supplying ghee adulterated with animal fat. The ghee is used to make the temple’s famed laddu ‘prasadam’ [food offered to dieties which is later distributed among devotees].
Earlier this year, the state Crime Investigation Department began probing the alleged theft of foreign currency donated at the temple’s ‘Hundi’. A clerk at the Parakamani (counting centre) is suspected to have siphoned off notes during counting.
- Follow the latest breaking news, major developments and agenda-setting stories from India and around the world with the newsdesk at Hindustan Times. Operating round the clock, the desk brings together experienced editors, reporters and correspondents to deliver fast, accurate and contextual reporting across subjects that influence public policy, governance, business, society and international affairs. The HT News Desk covers politics, elections, government policies, the economy, business and markets, science and technology, the environment, law and order, infrastructure, education, climate issues and geopolitics, while closely tracking developments across states, institutions and global capitals. The team also leads coverage of major breaking news events, policy announcements, court proceedings, natural disasters, public emergencies and significant international developments. Reports published by the newsdesk are based on information gathered from reporters on the ground, official statements, government agencies, court records, regulatory filings, recognised institutions and other authoritative sources. Stories undergo editorial scrutiny and verification processes to ensure accuracy, fairness and relevance, and are updated as events evolve and additional information becomes available. Whether covering a key political decision in New Delhi, an economic policy shift affecting millions, a landmark court ruling or a major global event, the HT News Desk aims to provide readers with reliable, fact-based journalism that delivers not only the latest developments but also the context and analysis needed to understand their wider implications.Read More ghee adulteration animal fat police complaint filed alleged Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat supplying ghee adulterated with animal fat ghee adulteration incident fflo:foundIn ghee allegedly supplying ghee adulterated with animal fat90:T10d5,CBI-led SIT secures custody of two key accused in Laddu ghee adulteration case thehansindia.com Tirupati: The probe into the Tirumala adulterated ghee scandal gained momentum on Monday after Nellore ACB Court handed over two key accused to the CBI Special Investigation Team (SIT) for custodial questioning. The four-day custody, granted separately for both suspects, is expected to help investigators dig deeper into the suspected network behind the large-scale tampering of ghee supplied to Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD).
One of the accused, Ajay Kumar Sugandh, listed as A-16 and proprietor of Sugandh Oil and Chemicals in New Delhi was produced before the court earlier in the day. His petition for bail was struck down, and the court allowed SIT to question him in custody from December 9 to 12. Sugandh has been in judicial custody since November 7.
Investigators say Sugandh worked closely with main accused Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain and supplied a range of chemical additives that were allegedly mixed with ghee delivered to the temple body.
According to the remand report, chemicals such as mono- and diglycerides, beta carotene, artificial flavours and other esters were routed to Harsh Fresh Foodz Pvt Ltd and Harsh Trading Company between 2022 and 2025. One particular chemical, acetic acid ester, was allegedly used to artificially boost the RM (Reichert–Miessl) value, helping poor-quality ghee pass standard purity checks.
In another development, the court approved a similar period of custodial interrogation for former TTD General Manager (Procurement) RSSVR Subrahmanyam, who was arrested on November 27. He is listed as A-29 in the case. The SIT has accused him of hiding crucial laboratory findings that indicated adulteration in ghee supplied to TTD.
Reports from the Central Food Technological Research Institute (CFTRI), Mysuru, in August 2022 had detected beta sitosterol—a compound pointing to vegetable oil content. However, officers say Subrahmanyam neither reported the findings to senior officials nor took corrective measures.
The investigation has also linked him to several alleged favours, including expensive gifts, cash payments and benefits routed through intermediaries. These inducements, the SIT claims, resulted in favourable inspection reports for dairy firms that later secured TTD supply contracts without meeting standards.
His tenure from 2017 to 2023 allegedly saw close connections develop with multiple dairies believed to have supplied nearly 68 lakh kg of adulterated ghee over five years.
During Monday’s hearing, Additional Public Prosecutor Jaya Shekar argued against granting bail, stressing that custodial questioning is essential to map the full network of suppliers, officials and middlemen. The SIT expects more arrests and seizures as the investigation progresses. ghee adulteration acetic acid ester custodial questioning arrest alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant acetic acid ester One particular chemical, acetic acid ester, was allegedly used to artificially boost the RM (Reichert–Miessl) value, helping poor-quality ghee pass standard purity checks. Laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Pomil Jain Sugandh worked closely with main accused Pomil Jain Laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Vipin Jain Sugandh worked closely with main accused Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain Laddu ghee adulteration prov:used ghee tampering of ghee supplied to Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams ghee fflo:hasAdulterant beta carotene chemicals such as mono- and diglycerides, beta carotene, artificial flavours and other esters were routed ghee fflo:hasAdulterant artificial flavours artificial flavours and other esters were routed artificially boost RM value fflo:hasFraudType Masking helping poor-quality ghee pass standard purity checks ghee adulteration at TTD prov:wasAssociatedWith RSSVR Subrahmanyam accused him of hiding crucial laboratory findings that indicated adulteration in ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant beta sitosterol detected beta sitosterol—a compound pointing to vegetable oil content ghee fflo:hasAdulterant beta sitosterol detected beta sitosterol—a compound pointing to vegetable oil content beta sitosterol fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee compound pointing to vegetable oil content91:T115a,SIT Gets 4-Day Custody Of 2 Accused In Tirumala Ghee Scam deccanchronicle.com The court granted more time to the CBI-led special investigation team to question the two in connection with the irregularities/corruption in the ghee procurement at TTD: Reports
TIRUPATI: Two accused in the Tirumala adulterated ghee case -- a former senior official of the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams and a Delhi-based chemical supplier -- were sent to a four-day police custody by the Nellore ACB Court on Monday.
The court granted more time to the CBI-led special investigation team to question the two in connection with the irregularities/corruption in the ghee procurement at TTD.
Ajay Kumar Sugandh, listed as Accused 16 in the case and owner of New Delhi-based Sugandh Oil and Chemicals, was arrested on Nov 7. He was produced before the court by the SIT on Monday, seeking his custody for more time to continue the questioning.
The court, rejecting his bail petition, allowed his police custody from December 9 to December 12.
According to the SIT, Sugandh worked with prime accused Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain in supplying chemicals to adulterate the ghee meant for TTD. The remand report said chemicals such as mono and diglycerides, lactic acid ester, acetic acid ester, beta carotene and artificial ghee essence were supplied to Harsh Fresh Foodz Pvt Ltd and Harsh Trading Company between 2022 and 2025.
Additional public prosecutor Jaya Shekar opposed Sugandh’s bail plea and sought police custody, stating that the case involved a serious breach of public trust.
He said custodial interrogation was required to trace the money trail, recover important records and identify the others involved. Granting bail at this stage could affect the investigation and influence witnesses.
The court also granted a four-day police custody of RSSVR Subrahmanyam, former general manager (procurement) of TTD, who is named as Accused 29 in the case. Arrested on November 27, his custody was permitted from December 9 to December 12.
As per the remand report, Subrahmanyam failed to act on crucial laboratory reports from the central food technological research institute (CFTRI), Mysuru that he had received in August, 2022.
The reports confirmed the presence of beta sitosterol, showing the ghee was mixed with vegetable oil.
Investigators said he neither informed senior officials nor took action against the suppliers.
The SIT alleged that Subrahmanyam, who handled procurement at TTD from 2017 to 2023, developed close links with Bhole Baba Organic Dairy, Sri Vyshnavi Dairy Specialities and Malganga Milk and Agro Products.
He received benefits through intermediaries and issued favourable inspection reports, which helped these dairies secure TTD contracts despite not meeting technical standards, the court was told. ghee adulteration substitution beta sitosterol vegetable oil police custody arrest alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant beta sitosterol reports confirmed the presence of beta sitosterol, showing the ghee was mixed with vegetable oil vegetable oil fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee showing the ghee was mixed with vegetable oil Tirumala Ghee Adulteration Act prov:wasAssociatedWith Ajay Kumar Sugandh Sugandh worked with prime accused Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain in supplying chemicals to adulterate the ghee Tirumala Ghee Adulteration Act prov:wasAssociatedWith Pomil Jain Sugandh worked with prime accused Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain in supplying chemicals to adulterate the ghee Tirumala Ghee Adulteration Act prov:wasAssociatedWith Vipin Jain Sugandh worked with prime accused Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain in supplying chemicals to adulterate the ghee Tirumala Ghee Adulteration Act prov:used ghee adulterate the ghee meant for TTD ghee fflo:hasAdulterant lactic acid ester chemicals such as... lactic acid ester... were supplied to... adulterate the ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant beta carotene chemicals such as... beta carotene... were supplied to... adulterate the ghee Tirumala Ghee Adulteration Act prov:wasAssociatedWith Harsh Fresh Foodz Pvt Ltd supplied to Harsh Fresh Foodz Pvt Ltd and Harsh Trading Company ghee adulteration at TTD prov:wasAssociatedWith RSSVR Subrahmanyam Subrahmanyam failed to act on crucial laboratory reports beta sitosterol fflo:detectedBy laboratory reports from CFTRI laboratory reports from the central food technological research institute (CFTRI), Mysuru that he had received92:T7d2,1500 kg of spurious ghee seized in factory raid in Delhi indianexpress.com NTC ERTH Vedik Desi Ghee, Gau Amrit, NAMDEV Desi Ghee, NTC Saras Gold and NS Nadan Saras–these are among the labels under which over 1500 litres of spurious ghee was being manufactured at a factory in Outer North Delhi’s Alipur, the police said on Thursday.
A tip-off was received about the racket on Tuesday, officers said.
“A thorough search was conducted at the factory premises of Bansal Agro Food Industries in Kheda Kalan, Alipur. Huge quantities of ready-for-distribution spurious desi ghee in different brands have been recovered,” DCP (outer north) Hareshwar Swami said.
The police also recovered over 55 litres of essence, which was being used to make the sub- standard products smell like the real deal,officers said.
“During investigation, it has been found that this factory was being run by one Gyanendra Singh. He has been making spurious desi ghee since 1995 and has been doing at the present address since 2014. He used to supply the spurious desi ghee in Delhi and adjoining states,” DCP Swami said. ghee adulteration counterfeit seizure raid alleged Delhi, Outer North Delhi, India manufacturing of spurious desi ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith Gyanendra Singh factory was being run by one Gyanendra Singh. He has been making spurious desi ghee manufacturing of spurious desi ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith Bansal Agro Food Industries A thorough search was conducted at the factory premises of Bansal Agro Food Industries in Kheda Kalan, Alipur. Huge quantities of ready-for-distribution spurious desi ghee in different brands have been recovered desi ghee fflo:hasAdulterant essence recovered over 55 litres of essence, which was being used to make the sub- standard products desi ghee fflo:hasAdulterant essence recovered over 55 litres of essence, which was being used to make the sub- standard products smell like the real deal masking with essence fflo:hasFraudType Masking smell like the real deal93:T788,1,500 kg spurious ghee seized during  raid in Delhi's Alipur newindianexpress.com NEW DELHI: large-scale spurious ‘desi ghee’ manufacturing unit was busted in the Alipur area, with police seizing 1,500 kg of clarified butter along with 55 litres of synthetic essence used to prepare it, police said.
A senior police officer said that information was received on Tuesday regarding an illegal ghee manufacturing factory operating in the area. The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) was informed, and a joint team conducted a raid following due legal procedures under the new law.
“During the search, the team found large quantities of ready-for-distribution spurious ghee stored in tins, cartons and packets. Samples were seized by FSSAI for laboratory examination,” he said.
Deputy Commissioner of Police (Outer North) Hareshwar Swami said, “A total of 1,500 litres of spurious desi ghee and 55 litres of essence used for making ghee have been recovered.”
During investigation, it was found that the factory was being run by Gyanendra Singh, who has allegedly been manufacturing fake desi ghee since 1995 and operating from the present address since 2014. He supplied the product across Delhi and adjoining states, Swami added. Police have registered an FIR and further investigation is underway. ghee adulteration counterfeit seizure of samples for laboratory examination raid FIR registered alleged New Delhi, Alipur, Delhi, India manufacturing of spurious desi ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith Gyanendra Singh factory was being run by Gyanendra Singh, who has allegedly been manufacturing fake desi ghee seizure of samples for laboratory examination fflo:issuedBy FSSAI Samples were seized by FSSAI for laboratory examination desi ghee fflo:hasAdulterant synthetic essence 55 litres of synthetic essence used to prepare it spurious desi ghee fflo:hasFraudType Substitution manufacturing fake desi ghee94:Ta0a,1,500 kg spurious ‘desi ghee’ seized during raid in Delhi’s Alipur indianexpress.com Acting on specific information on Tuesday, a team of the Outernorth district raided the premises of Bansal Agro Food Industries in Kheda Kalan, he said.
“The factory was involved in manufacturing and packaging fake desi ghee under multiple popular brand names in order to supply it across Delhi and neighbouring states,” Deputy Commissioner of Police (Outernorth) V Hareshwar Swami in a statement said.
He said the officials from the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) were roped in after the initial tip-off. A joint team conducted the raid following due legal procedures under the new law.
“During the search, the team found large quantities of ready-for-distribution spurious ghee in tins, cartons and packets. Samples were also seized by FSSAI for laboratory examination,” the DCP said.
The police said the unit was being operated by Gyanendra Singh, a resident of Burari, who has allegedly been involved in manufacturing fake desi ghee since 1995 and shifted his operation to the current premises in 2014.
“Singh used to distribute the product in the national capital and adjoining states. The total seizure includes 50 tins (15 litres each), 10 cartons of containing 30 packets (500 ml) per carton, nine cartons (1 litre), two tins of another brand (15 litres each), 21 tins of (15 litres each), eight tins of (15 litres each) and 11 plastic cans of 5 litres each of many different brands containing synthetic essence,” he added.
An FIR has been registered and a probe into the matter has been launched. The raid was carried out under the supervision of Joint Commissioner of Police (Northern Range) Vijay Singh. ghee adulteration counterfeit synthetic essence raid seizure FIR alleged Delhi, Alipur, India manufacturing fake desi ghee prov:used desi ghee manufacturing and packaging fake desi ghee raid on Bansal Agro Food Industries fflo:issuedBy FSSAI officials from the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) were roped in spurious ghee samples fflo:collectedAt Processing Samples were also seized by FSSAI for laboratory examination manufacturing fake desi ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith Bansal Agro Food Industries factory was involved in manufacturing and packaging fake desi ghee manufacturing fake desi ghee fflo:hasFraudType Substitution manufacturing and packaging fake desi ghee manufacturing fake desi ghee fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional manufacturing and packaging fake desi ghee under multiple popular brand names95:T8de,Inspection throws up health scare in form of expired foods, fake oil | Jaipur News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Jaipur: Health department food safety officers Tuesday found expired food products stored on racks during an inspection at Amazon Seller Services Pvt Ltd in Jhotwara Industrial Area. The expired items included coriander powder, masala buttermilk, pumpkin seeds and a 1kg packet of chickpeas, all past their expiry dates.
Officials also found dust accumulation on multiple packets and several leaking packs, terming the storage conditions unsafe for consumers. 
Samples of almond beverage, Unibic biscuits and cinnamon were collected for laboratory testing under the Food Safety and Standards Act, while all expired products were destroyed on the spot. Officials said legal action will follow after test reports are received.
The team also detected misleading labelling, with âKrista' brand bandhani hing being sold in place of genuine hing. A separate challan will be filed before the court for this violation, officials said. 
In a separate action, food safety officers investigated a complaint of fake Sona Sikka brand groundnut oil allegedly being sold in Jaipur. The complaint, filed by a representative of Shyam and Shyam Oil Pvt Ltd, led the team to Messrs Girraj Trading Company and Messrs Girraj Prasad Pradeep Kumar in Tunga. 
Shop owners told officials they had ordered Sona Sikka oil but found the supplied tins suspicious and promptly alerted the company, preventing the sale of potentially substandard oil. 
During inspection, 15 tins were found at one shop and 24 at another. Food safety officers seized all 39 tins and collected samples for testing at the Central State Food Laboratory. Further action will be taken based on the laboratory report. groundnut oil counterfeit substandard seizure sample collection suspected Jaipur, Rajasthan, India Unibic biscuits sample fflo:collectedAt Amazon Seller Services Pvt Ltd Samples of almond beverage, Unibic biscuits and cinnamon were collected Krista brand bandhani hing fflo:isSubstituteFor hing Krista brand bandhani hing being sold in place of genuine hing Analysis of Sona Sikka groundnut oil fso:isPerformedAt Central State Food Laboratory testing at the Central State Food Laboratory96:Td76,Patanjali ghee fails quality tests; Company fined Rs 1.40 lakh in Uttarakhand newindianexpress.com PITHORAGARH: A sample of ghee manufactured by the prominent Indian company Patanjali has failed quality control tests, leading to significant penalties imposed by a local court in Uttarakhand.
The failure, confirmed by both state and national laboratories, involved adulteration, prompting authorities to levy a combined fine exceeding Rs 1.40 lakh against the producer, distributor, and retailer.
The case dates back to October 2020, when Senior Food Safety Officer Dilip Jain collected a sample of Patanjali ghee from Karan General Store in Kashni, Pithoragarh, for routine inspection.
Initial testing at the Government Laboratory in Rudrapur revealed that the product did not meet prescribed standards and confirmed the presence of adulterants.
Following the initial failure, Patanjali Ayurved Limited challenged the findings.
In response, the sample was forwarded to the National Laboratory in Ghaziabad for a definitive review.
According to sources familiar with the matter, the national lab also confirmed the product was substandard, solidifying the case against the manufacturers and sellers.
The Food Safety Officer subsequently filed a case in the court of the Additional District Magistrate, Pithoragarh. Delivering the verdict this past Thursday, ADM Yogendra Singh, after hearing all arguments and reviewing the evidence, ruled against the implicated parties.
The ruling stipulated a penalty of Rs 1,00,000 against the producer, Patanjali Ayurved Limited. Furthermore, the distributor, Brahm Accessories of Dharchula Road, Pithoragarh, was fined Rs 25,000, while the retailer, Karan General Store, was penalised Rs 15,000.
The decision against the nationally recognised brand has sparked considerable discussion across the state and beyond regarding food safety standards.
Food Safety Officer Dilip Jain commented on the ruling, stating, "The integrity of food products is paramount. This judgment sends a clear message that even high-profile brands must adhere strictly to the established quality benchmarks set for consumer safety." ghee adulteration substandard adulterants fine lab_confirmed Pithoragarh, Uttarakhand, India Patanjali ghee quality failure fflo:inRegion Uttarakhand Patanjali ghee fails quality tests; Company fined Rs 1.40 lakh in Uttarakhand Patanjali ghee fflo:hasAdulterant adulterants confirmed the presence of adulterants adulteration of Patanjali ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith Patanjali Ayurved Limited case against the manufacturers Patanjali ghee adulteration finding fflo:foundAtStep Retail collected a sample of Patanjali ghee from Karan General Store initial testing of Patanjali ghee fso:isPerformedAt Government Laboratory in Rudrapur Initial testing at the Government Laboratory in Rudrapur definitive review of Patanjali ghee fso:isPerformedAt National Laboratory in Ghaziabad sample was forwarded to the National Laboratory in Ghaziabad for a definitive review Patanjali ghee adulteration finding fflo:foundIn Patanjali ghee national lab also confirmed the product was substandard Patanjali ghee adulteration finding fflo:triggeredAction fine against producer, distributor, and retailer prompting authorities to levy a combined fine Patanjali ghee quality failure incident fflo:triggeredAction fine against Patanjali Ayurved Limited The ruling stipulated a penalty of Rs 1,00,000 against the producer97:T1238,Despite CFTRI red flag, adulterated ghee used in laddus for 2 years: SIT thehansindia.com Tirupati: The CBI-led Special Investigation Team (SIT) found that adulterated ghee was used in preparing the Tirumala laddu prasadam for almost two years after the Central Food Technological Research Institute (CFTRI), Mysuru, formally warned the TTD about contamination in August 2022.
The CBI-led Special Investigation Team (SIT), which is probing the adulteration case, says the laboratory findings were neither acted upon nor communicated to senior management, allowing implicated dairies to continue supplying ghee well into 2024.  
According to the memo, CFTRI’s report dated August 3, 2022 identified beta-sitosterol, a decisive marker of vegetable oil adulteration, in samples taken from Bhole Baba Organic Dairy, Premier Agro Foods and Sri Vyshnavi Dairy Specialities. The warehouse wing forwarded these results to then General Manager (Procurement) RSSVR Subrahmanyam (A-29), but the SIT says he did not disclose them to higher authorities or initiate action mandated under tender conditions.  
As a result, Bhole Baba Organic Dairy, despite being disqualified a month earlier for failing Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) norms, continued supplying ghee until October 2022. Premier Agro Foods and Sri Vyshnavi Dairy continued deliveries into 2024, even though all three dairies were named in CFTRI’s adulteration findings.  
The SIT alleges that suppression of the lab results occurred at multiple points. Junior assistant P Eswar Reddy (A-25), posted at Godown-IV, allegedly withheld the CFTRI report from the file movement chain while facilitating tanker unloading for the same dairies.  
He is accused of receiving Rs 23,600 from their representatives between June 2022 and November 2024. Former deputy executive officer (Warehouse) P Venkata Natesh Babu (A-27), alleged to have taken Rs 18,100 in cash and Rs 2,000 digitally, also permitted ghee consignments to be unloaded before test results were reviewed.  
The memo states that senior assistant M Venkata Anil Kumar (A-26), who allegedly received Rs 59,600, supported internal notings favouring additional allocations for Bhole Baba after its disqualification. Along with Subrahmanyam, he is also accused of recommending exemptions from revised FSSR standards for two dairies in 2022 — standards that specifically required beta-sitosterol testing.  
The SIT says the continued use of adulterated ghee was enabled by this combination of omissions and deliberate suppression. It notes that ghee blended with palm oil, palmolein, palm kernel oil, beta-carotene, acetic acid ester and ghee-flavouring agents continued entering TTD stores and was used in laddu preparation until 2024, causing financial loss to the institution and ‘hurting the sentiments of crores of devotees’. ghee adulteration CFTRI identified beta-sitosterol, a marker of vegetable oil adulteration, in ghee samples. Ghee blended with palm oil, palmolein, palm kernel oil, beta-carotene, acetic acid ester and ghee-flavouring agents continued entering TTD stores and was used in laddu preparation until 2024. pending_test India, Tirupati ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil ghee blended with palm oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palmolein ghee blended with palm oil, palmolein, palm kernel oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm kernel oil ghee blended with palm oil, palmolein, palm kernel oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant acetic acid ester ghee blended with palm oil, palmolein, palm kernel oil, beta-carotene, acetic acid ester adulterated ghee fflo:hasAdulterant beta-sitosterol identified beta-sitosterol, a decisive marker of vegetable oil adulteration beta-sitosterol fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee marker of vegetable oil adulteration Bhole Baba Organic Dairy prov:wasAttributedTo CFTRI report identifying beta-sitosterol CFTRI's report dated August 3, 2022 identified beta-sitosterol... in samples taken from Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Sri Vyshnavi Dairy Specialities fflo:hasAdulterant beta-sitosterol CFTRI's report dated August 3, 2022 identified beta-sitosterol... in samples taken from... Sri Vyshnavi Dairy Specialities finding of beta-sitosterol in ghee fflo:supportedBy CFTRI report dated August 3, 2022 CFTRI's report dated August 3, 2022 identified beta-sitosterol CFTRI report fflo:identifies beta-sitosterol CFTRI's report dated August 3, 2022 identified beta-sitosterol beta-sitosterol fflo:foundIn ghee identified beta-sitosterol, a decisive marker of vegetable oil adulteration, in samples suppression of lab results prov:wasAssociatedWith RSSVR Subrahmanyam Along with Subrahmanyam, he is also accused of recommending exemptions98:Tdbf,SIT names 12 more officials, experts in Tirupati laddu ghee case newindianexpress.com TIRUPATI: The Supreme Court-appointed CBI-led Special Investigation Team (SIT) probing the adulterated ghee scam linked to the preparation of Srivari Laddu Prasadam at Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) has named 12 more officials and experts as accused, expanding the scope of its inquiry. With this, the number of accused has crossed 35, exposing what investigators describe as a deep nexus involving TTD officials, technical experts and private dairy suppliers.
The SIT filed a special memo in the Nellore ACB Court seeking to add A-25 to A-36 to the case. Officials said external dairy experts from Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Telangana, along with senior TTD officers who earlier served as General Managers in the marketing and procurement wings, have been included in the latest list.
In a major development, the SIT named retired General Manager (Procurement) Pralayakaveri Murali Krishna — the original complainant — as A-30.
Investigators allege that he colluded with dairy representatives and enabled the supply of adulterated ghee while serving on the TTD Technical Committee. The SIT said he and other officials accepted bribes from suppliers and, despite receiving a CFTRI report confirming adulteration, failed to alert higher authorities, allowing the unloading and use of spurious ghee for laddu production.
The newly added accused include Deputy Executive Officer (Warehouse) PV Natesh Babu (A-27), former General Manager (Procurement) P Jagadeeswara Reddy (A-28), former General Manager (Procurement) RSSVR Subrahmanyam (A-29) and former SV Goshala Director Dr K Harinath Reddy (A-31). External dairy experts responsible for plant inspections have been booked for allegedly issuing favourable reports without conducting proper checks.
According to the SIT, these lapses enabled ineligible dairies, including M/s Bhole Baba Organic Dairy, to qualify for TTD tenders. ghee adulteration adulterated ghee naming of accused alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India Srivari Laddu Prasadam fflo:hasAdulterant adulterated ghee adulterated ghee scam linked to the preparation of Srivari Laddu Prasadam adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt laddu production use of spurious ghee for laddu production adulterated ghee scam prov:wasAssociatedWith TTD officials deep nexus involving TTD officials adulterated ghee scam prov:wasAssociatedWith private dairy suppliers nexus involving TTD officials, technical experts and private dairy suppliers ghee adulteration at TTD prov:wasAssociatedWith Pralayakaveri Murali Krishna Investigators allege that he colluded with dairy representatives and enabled the supply of adulterated ghee adulterated ghee finding fflo:supportedBy CFTRI report CFTRI report confirming adulteration supply of adulterated ghee fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional colluded with dairy representatives and enabled the supply of adulterated ghee Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith PV Natesh Babu newly added accused include Deputy Executive Officer (Warehouse) PV Natesh Babu Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Dr K Harinath Reddy newly added accused include... former SV Goshala Director Dr K Harinath Reddy Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith PV Natesh Babu Deputy Executive Officer (Warehouse) PV Natesh Babu Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith P Jagadeeswara Reddy former General Manager (Procurement) P Jagadeeswara Reddy99:T1075,Adulterated ghee: Former TTD procurement GM colluded with dairy firms, says SIT | Vijayawada News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Tirupati: The special investigation team probing the TTD laddu ghee adulteration case has established alleged connivance between RSSVR Subrahmanyam, the temple body's former general manager (procurement), and promoters of Bhole Baba dairy and others. Subrahmanyam was arrested by the SIT on Thursday.
In its remand report filed before the ACB court in Nellore, the SIT detailed how Subrahmanyam misused his official position and pledged support to the dubious dairy firms, which resulted in the supply of 68 lakh kg of adulterated ghee to the TTD, which was used in the preparation of the sacred laddu prasadam.
Subrahmanyam twice served as general manager (procurement) with TTD â from July 6, 2017, to May 17, 2018, and from May 13, 2018, to May 1, 2023. Commodities such as ghee, cashew nuts, and cardamom for preparation of laddu prasadam were procured during his tenure.
According to the SIT remand report, between 2021 and 2023, Subrahmanyam reportedly accepted gifts and cash, including a mobile phone worth Rs 50,000 and Rs 3.5 lakh in cash from Pomil Jain of Bhole Baba dairy. He also received a silver plate worth Rs 16,700 and a 50-gram silver coin from representatives of the dubious dairies.
In return, Subrahmanyam and other technical committee members allegedly submitted âfalse' and âfavourable' plant inspection reports for dairies like Bhole Baba, Sri Vyshnavi, and Malganga, which allowed them to secure ghee supply contracts repeatedly despite being technically unqualified to participate in TTD tenders, the SIT investigation found.
The SIT report further mentioned that Subrahmanyam shared contact information of ghee suppliers with Kaduru Chinna Appanna (accused No. 24) in May 2022, who attempted to influence the ghee tender procurement process by getting Bhole Baba dairy disqualified when TTD called for tenders for 24.5 lakh kg of cow ghee on May 10, 2022.
Although Bhole Baba dairy was disqualified following a plant inspection on June 6, 2022, reportedly due to pressure from Appanna, Subrahmanyam recommended issuing additional supply orders to Bhole Baba for procurement of 9,450 kg of ghee at Rs 329.32/kg and 1.07 lakh kg at Rs 329/kg to TTD.
A key aspect in the SIT remand report, which corroborates with former TTD chairman YV Subba Reddy's statement, was that on May 20, 2022, when Subba Reddy directed TTD officials to send ghee samples from all dairies for adulteration tests, Subrahmanyam issued a memo to the warehouse dept to draw samples of cow ghee supplied in tins and tankers. Samples of Premier Agri Foods, Bhole Baba dairy, and Sri Vyshnavi dairy were sent to CFTRI-Mysore for tests in June 2022.
Although CFTRI reports dated Aug 3, 2022, confirmed that the "ghee was adulterated with vegetable oils", the test reports were deliberately suppressed by Subrahmanyam, who continued to issue additional supply orders to the the three dairies, the SIT report stated. It further emphasised in its remand report that Subrahmanyam's actions not only caused wrongful financial loss to TTD but also compromised the sanctity of the sacred laddu prasadam. ghee adulteration substitution vegetable oils arrest investigation alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India Submission of false plant inspection reports prov:wasAssociatedWith Subrahmanyam Subrahmanyam and other technical committee members allegedly submitted âfalse' and âfavourable' plant inspection reports ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable oils ghee was adulterated with vegetable oils TTD ghee adulteration act prov:used ghee supply of 68 lakh kg of adulterated ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant unspecified adulterant in ghee supply of 68 lakh kg of adulterated ghee Adulteration tests on ghee samples fso:isPerformedAt CFTRI-Mysore Samples ... were sent to CFTRI-Mysore for tests Adulteration tests on ghee samples fso:isPerformedOn Cow ghee samples draw samples of cow ghee supplied in tins and tankers ghee adulteration finding fflo:supportedBy CFTRI reports dated Aug 3, 2022 CFTRI reports dated Aug 3, 2022, confirmed that the ghee was adulterated with vegetable oils9a:T1326,CBI-SIT arraigns seven TTD staffers and five external dairy experts as accused in TTD laddu ghee adulteration case | Vijayawada News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Tirupati: The CBI-led special investigation team (SIT) arraigned seven staffers of the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) and five external dairy experts as accused in the TTD laddu ghee adulteration case.
The SIT, which sped up the investigation in the laddu ghee adulteration case, recently filed a memo at the SPE & ACB court in Nellore, arraigning seven TTD staffers and five dairy experts as accused (A-25 to A-36) in the case.
The accused TTD staffers are Palli Eswar Reddy, junior assistant in TTD's warehouse, Muddu Venkata Anil Kumar, senior assistant, Polepalli Venkata Natesh Babu, former deputy executive officer (TTD warehouse), Peruru Jagadeeswara Reddy, executive engineer, who earlier worked as general manager, procurement, RSSVR Subrahmanyam, executive engineer, who earlier worked twice as GM, procurement, P Murali Krishna, retired TTD GM-procurement; and Dr K Haranath Reddy, director of TTD Goshala.
The five external dairy experts were on the TTD technical committees for plant inspections. They are Dr Mallam Mahender, Dr V Venkata Subramanian, M Vijaya Bhaskara Reddy, Dr Battula Surendranath, and Dr K Jayaraj Rao.
In the memo filed before the SPE & ACB court, the SIT detailed how the seven TTD staffers misused their official positions and pledged support to the representatives of various dairies, including Bhole Baba Organic Dairy, Sri Vyshnavi Dairy Specialties, Malganga Dairy, AR Dairy Foods, Premier Agri Foods, etc., 
for successfully getting the ghee supply contracts despite being technically unqualified. This led to the supply of 68 lakh kgs of adulterated ghee to the Tirupati trust, which was eventually used in the preparation of laddus.
The SIT also detailed the manner in which the external dairy experts, who were all members of the TTD's technical committees for plant inspections, submitted false and favourable inspection reports for several dairies in lieu of kickbacks. This helped the dubious dairies get qualified for successfully bidding for TTD ghee supply contracts worth several hundreds of crores of rupees.
The SIT stated in the memo that the connivance of the TTD staffers and external dairy experts with the representatives of Bhole Baba and other dairies led to the supply of a staggering quantity of 68 lakh kgs of adulterated ghee to the Tirupati trust, which was eventually used in the preparation of the sacred Tirumala Laddu prasadams between 2021 and 2024. ghee adulteration unknown arraignment alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India TTD laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith TTD staffers seven TTD staffers misused their official positions and pledged support to the representatives of various dairies, including Bhole Baba Organic Dairy, Sri Vyshnavi Dairy Specialties, Malganga Dairy, AR Dairy Foods, Premier Agri Foods, etc., for successfully getting the ghee supply contracts despite being technically unqualified. This led to the supply of 68 lakh kgs of adulterated ghee to the Tirupati trust, which was eventually used in the preparation of laddus. TTD laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Palli Eswar Reddy The accused TTD staffers are Palli Eswar Reddy TTD laddu ghee adulteration case prov:wasAssociatedWith Dr K Haranath Reddy The accused TTD staffers are ... Dr K Haranath Reddy, director of TTD Goshala TTD laddu ghee adulteration case prov:wasAssociatedWith Dr Mallam Mahender The five external dairy experts were on the TTD technical committees for plant inspections. They are Dr Mallam Mahender TTD laddu ghee adulteration case prov:wasAssociatedWith Dr V Venkata Subramanian arraigning seven TTD staffers and five dairy experts as accused TTD laddu ghee adulteration case prov:wasAssociatedWith M Vijaya Bhaskara Reddy arraigning seven TTD staffers and five dairy experts as accused TTD laddu ghee adulteration prov:used ghee supply of 68 lakh kgs of adulterated ghee TTD laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith external dairy experts connivance of the TTD staffers and external dairy experts TTD laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba Organic Dairy supply of 68 lakh kgs of adulterated ghee to the Tirupati trust supply of 68 lakh kgs of adulterated ghee to the Tirupati trust prov:wasAssociatedWith Sri Vyshnavi Dairy Specialties supply of 68 lakh kgs of adulterated ghee to the Tirupati trust TTD laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Malganga Dairy supply of 68 lakh kgs of adulterated ghee to the Tirupati trust TTD laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith AR Dairy Foods supply of 68 lakh kgs of adulterated ghee to the Tirupati trust TTD laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Premier Agri Foods supply of 68 lakh kgs of adulterated ghee to the Tirupati trust9b:T1dad,Spiked Ghee Flowed In As TTD Neglected Plant Inspections for Six Years deccanchronicle.com Significantly, the SIT cited specific inspections to show how the process had been bypassed.
Tirupati: Inspecting supplier plants is a mandatory part of the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams’ ghee procurement system. No inspection took place for six straight years between 2018 and 2024, the SIT of CBI has found. This ignored technical norm enabled four dairies to repeatedly secure multi-crore ghee tenders.
In the remand memo filed before the SPE and ACB Court in Nellore, the SIT made it clear that a group of procurement officials and external dairy experts manipulated inspections necessary to check good manufacturing practices (GMP). These inspections are necessary ahead of deciding whether the dairies can qualify for financial bidding.
Despite failing to meet standards, Bhole Baba Organic Dairy, Sri Vyshnavi Dairy Specialities, Malganga Milk and Agro Products and AR Dairy Foods continued to remain eligible to bid for TTD’s tenders for procurement of ghee year after year from 2018 to 2023, the remand memo underlined.
Specifically, the SIT has named in this regard TTD’s former general managers (Procurement) Peruru Jagadeeswara Reddy (A-28), R.S.S.V.R. Subrahmanyam (A-29) and Pralayakaveri Murali Krishna (A-30); SV Goshala director Dr. K. Haranath Reddy (A-31), and external experts Dr. M. Mahender (A-32), Dr. V. Venkatasubramanian (A-33), M. Vijay Bhaskara Reddy (A-34), Dr. B. Surendranath (A-35) and Dr. K. Jayaraj Rao (A-36). They allegedly suppressed GMP lapses, hygiene violations, documentation gaps and FSSAI licensing issues, apart from altering findings that let the impugned dairies continue supplying the ghee.
Significantly, the SIT cited specific inspections to show how the process had been bypassed. Harsh Fresh Dairy, later operating as Bhole Baba Organic Dairy, had been cleared on May 27, 2018 and February 18, 2019 to bid for 73,000-kg Agmark tin-ghee and 82,000-kg cow ghee tenders, respectively, despite not meeting norms. On January 8, 2020 and March 15, 2021, Sri Vyshnavi Dairy and Bhole Baba had been deemed fit for several tanker and tin-ghee tenders.
Inspections at Bhole Baba’s Bhagwanpur and Fatehpur units on December 22 and December 23, 2021 linked to 25-lakh-kg (tanker-ghee) and 63,000-kg (tin-ghee) national tenders received favourable reports despite technical violations. Such manipulated clearances, the SIT said, allowed supply of ghee, including its adulterated consignments, for making the sacred Tirumala laddu prasadam.
The SIT said several of the accused officials and dairy experts received inducements in return for their approvals. According to the memo, dairy expert Vijay Bhaskara Reddy reportedly received ₹2.5 lakh per inspection from Jagmohan Gupta, MD of Premier Agri Foods. Surendranath and Jayaraj Rao allegedly accepted ₹50,000 mobile phones from Pomil Jain (A-3) when the two visited Bhole Baba’s Bhagwanpur unit on December 22, 2021.
Former TTD GM Subrahmanyam has been accused of taking a silver plate worth ₹16,700, a ₹50,000 phone, a 50-gram silver coin and ₹3.5 lakh between 2022 and 2023 and in November 2023. The other two former GMs Jagadeeswara Reddy and Murali Krishna allegedly received a 50-gram silver coin each. These inducements, the SIT charged, are closely linked to favourable inspection outcomes.
The memo also detailed the role of three more employees who allegedly enabled the entry of ghee supplied by the four dairies into TTD stores. Junior assistant P. Eswar Reddy (A-25) allegedly took ₹23,600 from the dairies between June 2022 and November 2024. He is accused of making tanker unloading easy, forwarding invoices and suppressing an August 3, 2022 CFTRI report that confirmed adulteration in samples from three dairies.
Senior assistant M. Venkata Anil Kumar (A-26) allegedly accepted ₹59,600 and helped clear related files. He is accused of enabling Bhole Baba to secure an additional 15 per cent allocation in tin and tanker tenders despite its disqualification on June 6, 2022 for failing to meet GMP norms.
Former Warehouse deputy executive officer P. Venkata Natesh Babu (A-27) allegedly received ₹18,100 in cash and ₹2,000 through digital transfer from a Bhole Baba representative. He is accused of facilitating sample collection, signing stock certificates and allowing unloading of ghee.
The SIT summarised that compromised inspections owing to financial inducements and internal facilitation enabled adulterated ghee to enter TTD stores for years, causing losses to TTD and undermining the sanctity of the sacred laddus.
Highlights:
Violations between 2018 and 2024:
- May 27, 2018: Harsh Fresh Dairy (later Bhole Baba) cleared for 73,000-kg tin-ghee tender.
- February 18, 2019: Bhole Baba and Sri Vyshnavi approved for 82,000-kg tin-ghee tender; later for 2.5 lakh kg tanker tender.
- January 8, 2020: Inspections for 32,000-kg tin tender and 2 lakh kg AP-category tanker supply cleared again.
- Mar 15, 2021: Sri Vyshnavi & Bhole Baba approved for 4.5 lakh-kg tanker tender.
- December 22, 2021: Bhagwanpur plant of Bhole Baba cleared for 25-lakh kg national tender; SIT flags inducements to experts during this visit.
- June 6, 2022: Bhole Baba disqualified for failing GMP; yet later recommended for supply of 9,450 kg at ₹329.32/kg and 1.07 lakh kg at ₹329/kg.
- 2022–23: Favourable reports despite earlier CFTRI warnings after inspections for 5 lakh–10 lakh kg tenders.
- 2024: No new inspections listed, but participation in tender for supply of ghee continued owing to earlier approvals. ghee adulteration suppression supply pending_test India, Tirupati TTD Ghee Procurement Fraud prov:wasAssociatedWith Malganga Milk and Agro Products Malganga Milk and Agro Products... continued to remain eligible to bid Adulteration of ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba Organic Dairy allowed supply of ghee, including its adulterated consignments ghee fflo:hasAdulterant Adulterant in ghee supply of ghee, including its adulterated consignments TTD Ghee Procurement Adulteration Act prov:wasAssociatedWith Subrahmanyam Former TTD GM Subrahmanyam has been accused of taking a silver plate TTD Ghee Procurement Adulteration Act prov:wasAssociatedWith Jagadeeswara Reddy The other two former GMs Jagadeeswara Reddy and Murali Krishna allegedly received TTD Ghee Procurement Adulteration Act prov:wasAssociatedWith Murali Krishna The other two former GMs Jagadeeswara Reddy and Murali Krishna allegedly received TTD Ghee Procurement Adulteration Act prov:wasAssociatedWith P. Eswar Reddy Junior assistant P. Eswar Reddy (A-25) allegedly took ₹23,600 Suppression of CFTRI Adulteration Report prov:wasAssociatedWith P. Eswar Reddy suppressing an August 3, 2022 CFTRI report that confirmed adulteration TTD Ghee Procurement Adulteration Act prov:wasAssociatedWith M. Venkata Anil Kumar Senior assistant M. Venkata Anil Kumar (A-26) allegedly accepted ₹59,600 TTD Ghee Procurement Adulteration Act prov:wasAssociatedWith P. Venkata Natesh Babu Former Warehouse deputy executive officer P. Venkata Natesh Babu (A-27) allegedly received Facilitation of Adulterated Ghee Unloading prov:wasAssociatedWith P. Venkata Natesh Babu allowing unloading of ghee CFTRI Report on Ghee Adulteration fflo:identifies Adulterant in Ghee CFTRI report that confirmed adulteration in samples from three dairies ghee fflo:hasAdulterant unspecified adulterant enabled adulterated ghee to enter TTD stores adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt Retail enabled adulterated ghee to enter TTD stores9c:Tc2f,7 TTD Officials, 5 Dairy Experts Arraigned In Ghee Adulteration Case deccanchronicle.com Fraudulent deals involved hundreds of crores of rupees: Court
TIRUPATI: A remand memo submitted by investigators to the SPE and ACB Court in Nellore on Friday, with new names, has widened the Tirumala laddu ghee adulteration probe.
The CBI-led special investigation team named seven TTD employees and five external dairy experts as fresh accused. The allegedly fraudulent deals involved hundreds of crores of rupees, it is submitted.
The SIT, which has been examining the administrative and technical clearances given for ghee procurement, informed the court that the 12 individuals have been listed as accused numbers A-25 to A-36.
Their inclusion follows a review of how certain dairies obtained eligibility even as they failed to meet technical norms. The memo stated that the coordination between TTD officials and the external experts played a key role in the supply of about 68 lakh kg of adulterated ghee to the TTD.
According to the memo, the external experts responsible for plant inspections allegedly issued favourable or misleading assessments for several private dairies. Based on these, the dairies secured ghee supply contracts.
Those named include Dr M Mahender, Dr V Venkata Subramanian, M Vijaya Bhaskara Reddy, Dr B Surendranath and Dr K Jayaraj Rao. Their reports, the SIT noted, helped certain dairies qualify for contracts running into hundreds of crores.
The SIT investigation points to a similar pattern within TTD’s own ranks. The seven staff members now arraigned have been accused of misusing their positions to support bidders linked to Bhole Baba Organic Dairy, Sri Vyshnavi Dairy, Malganga Dairy, AR Dairy Foods, Premier Agri Foods etc.
Those named include former general managers (Procurement) RSSVR Subrahmanyam and P Murali Krishna, former warehouse deputy executive officer P Venkata Natesh Babu, former Goshala director Dr K Haranath Reddy, executive engineer P Jagadeeswara Reddy, junior assistant P Eswar Reddy, and senior assistant M Venkata Anil Kumar.
The memo said their actions enabled technically unqualified firms to secure contracts worth several hundred crores. ghee adulteration adulterated ghee arraignment alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt TTD supply of about 68 lakh kg of adulterated ghee to the TTD Ghee Adulteration Act prov:wasAssociatedWith TTD Officials coordination between TTD officials and the external experts played a key role in the supply of about 68 lakh kg of adulterated ghee Ghee Adulteration Act prov:wasAssociatedWith External Dairy Experts external experts responsible for plant inspections allegedly issued favourable or misleading assessments Ghee Adulteration Act prov:used ghee Tirumala laddu ghee adulteration probe Ghee Adulteration Act prov:wasAssociatedWith External Dairy Experts external experts responsible for plant inspections allegedly issued favourable or misleading assessments Ghee Adulteration Act prov:wasAssociatedWith Private Dairies supply of about 68 lakh kg of adulterated ghee to the TTD9d:T128e,TTD Official Arrested in Tirumala Laddu Ghee Adulteration Case newkerala.com Laddu adulteration case: SIT arrests Tirumala temple official
Tirupati, Nov 28
The Supreme Court-appointed Special Investigation Team (SIT) has arrested a serving official of Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam (TTD) in the Laddu prasadam ghee adulteration case.
The SIT, led by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), arrested senior TTD Engineering Department official RSSVR Subrahmanyam in connection with the TTD laddu-ghee adulteration case.
Subrahmanyam had earlier served as the General Manager (Procurement) at TTD and was responsible for procuring key materials, including the ghee used for preparing laddus, said Sarvasresti Tripathi, a member of SIT and Guntur Range IG.
The SIT produced him before the ACB Court, which remanded him in judicial custody for 15 days.
He is the 29th accused in the case. With his arrest, a total of nine people have been held so far. He is the first serving TTD official to be arrested.
Subramanyam was part of the technical team inspecting ghee manufacturing units. He had allegedly inspected units and issued quality certificates in exchange for bribes from private suppliers.
The SIT arrested him based on the statements of some accused. These statements established the nexus between TTD's marketing wing and private dairy owners.
The SIT recently questioned former TTD chairman and YSR Congress Parliamentary Party leader YV Subba Reddy, during whose tenure adulterated ghee was allegedly used for making laddus.
The SIT also grilled former TTD executive officer A. V. Dharma Reddy on lapses during his tenure in the procurement of ghee, verification of suppliers, and quality control measures.
He was reportedly questioned on how Bhole Baba Dairy, blacklisted by TTD in 2022, allegedly continued supplying ghee through proxy firms.
The SIT reportedly found that between 2019 and 2024, around 20 crore laddus were made using adulterated ghee.
Out of the total 48.76 crore laddus produced during this period, nearly 40 per cent were found to contain palm oil, palm kernel oil, and other chemical additives.
The SIT recently arrested one Ajay Kumar Sugandh, who supplied various chemicals to Bhole Baba Dairy.
The investigation by SIT revealed that Bhole Baba Organic Dairy of Uttarakhand never procured a single drop of milk or butter from anywhere, yet managed to supply 68 lakh kgs of ghee to the TTD between 2019 and 2024 through its proxies, including Nellore-based Vyshnavi Dairy, Maharashtra-based Mal Ganga Dairy and Tamil Nadu-based AR Dairy.
The promoters of Bhole Baba Dairy allegedly established a full-fledged fake desi ghee manufacturing unit and supplied 68 lakh kg spurious ghee, valued at Rs 250 crore, to TTD for use in preparing laddu prasadam.
The SIT last month arrested K Chinna Appanna, a close aide of Subba Reddy.
Appanna, who served as Subba Reddy's personal assistant from 2014 to 2024, allegedly played a key role in awarding contracts to ineligible dairies.
The alleged laddu scam came to light after the Telugu Desam Party-led coalition came to power in June 2024. In September, the state government constituted an SIT headed by Inspector General Sarvashreshta Tripathi to probe into the case.
However, on the petitions challenging the constitution of the SIT by the state government, the Supreme Court in October 2024 ordered the creation of a new, independent five-member SIT, replacing the state-appointed SIT.
The SC-appointed SIT consists of two CBI officers, two senior police officers from Andhra Pradesh, and one official from the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI).
— IANS ghee adulteration arrest pending_test India, Tirumala TTD Laddu Ghee Adulteration Act prov:wasAssociatedWith RSSVR Subrahmanyam arrested senior TTD Engineering Department official RSSVR Subrahmanyam in connection with the TTD laddu-ghee adulteration case Establishment of fake desi ghee manufacturing unit prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba Dairy promoters of Bhole Baba Dairy allegedly established a full-fledged fake desi ghee manufacturing unit TTD Laddu Ghee Adulteration Act prov:used laddu Laddu prasadam ghee adulteration case TTD Laddu Ghee Adulteration Act prov:used ghee Laddu prasadam ghee adulteration case Issuing quality certificates in exchange for bribes fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional in exchange for bribes from private suppliers laddu fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil nearly 40 per cent were found to contain palm oil laddu fflo:hasAdulterant chemical additives nearly 40 per cent were found to contain palm oil, palm kernel oil, and other chemical additives ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Ajay Kumar Sugandh arrested one Ajay Kumar Sugandh, who supplied various chemicals9e:T923,TTD officer arrested in ghee case newindianexpress.com TIRUPATI: The Supreme Court-appointed CBI-led Special Investigation Team (SIT) on Thursday arrested a serving TTD officer in the Srivari Laddu adulterated ghee case, marking a major breakthrough.
The SIT took into custody Accused No. 29, former General Manager (Procurement & Marketing) and current EE-1, RSSVR Subramanyam, the first serving TTD official arrested. He was part of the technical team inspecting ghee manufacturing units. SIT officials said Subramanyam inspected units and issued quality certificates in exchange for bribes from private suppliers. He was detained around 1.30 pm at the SIT office, taken for a medical examination at SVRRG Hospital and produced before the ACB Court, which remanded him in judicial custody for 15 days.
Statements from arrested accused (A2 to A5) indicated his role. The SIT submitted details of the quality verification process and how private dairies violated TTD standards. Confession statements established the nexus between TTD’s marketing wing and private dairy owners, including bribe routes and financial transfers.
His arrest raises the number of arrests to nine. Some are on bail. The SIT has intensified efforts to trace another key accused, Karimulla, a relative of Srivaishnavi Dairy CEO Apoorva Chawadi. Officials said a former TTD board member (2022–24) is under probe. ghee adulteration adulterated ghee arrest alleged Tirupati, Andhra Pradesh, India Srivari Laddu ghee adulteration prov:used ghee Srivari Laddu adulterated ghee case Srivari Laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith RSSVR Subramanyam arrested a serving TTD officer in the Srivari Laddu adulterated ghee case Srivari Laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith RSSVR Subramanyam arrested a serving TTD officer in the Srivari Laddu adulterated ghee case issuing quality certificates for bribes prov:wasAssociatedWith RSSVR Subramanyam issued quality certificates in exchange for bribes from private suppliers TTD standards fflo:appliesToFood ghee private dairies violated TTD standards arrest of RSSVR Subramanyam fflo:issuedBy CBI-led Special Investigation Team CBI-led Special Investigation Team (SIT) on Thursday arrested arrest of RSSVR Subramanyam fflo:targets ghee arrested a serving TTD officer in the Srivari Laddu adulterated ghee case9f:Tcbe,Tirupati laddu scam: CBI-SIT makes 1st arrest within TTD, nabs senior procurement official | Hyderabad News - The Times of India indiatimes.com TIRUPATI: The CBI-led special investigation team (SIT) on Thursday made the first arrest within 
Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) in connection with the multi-crore laddu ghee adulteration case, taking into custody senior engineering department official RSSVR Subrahmanyam, who earlier served as the general manager (procurement), in Tirupati.
Between 2019 and 2024, Subrahmanyam oversaw purchases of ghee and other high-value ingredients such as cashew nuts and cardamom worth several hundred crores of rupees.
According to TTD records, Subrahmanyam held the procurement GM's post twice â from July 2017 to May 2018 and again from May 2020 to May 2023. He was later transferred and has been serving as an executive engineer at Tirumala.
The SIT has so far named 29 accused in the case, including nearly 10 dairy owners and representatives arrested earlier for supplying adulterated ghee between 2019 and 2024.
Sources said the SIT had uncovered a money trail linking procurement officials and ghee contractors, with huge kickbacks allegedly paid. Between 2019 and 2024, the TTD procured 1.61 crore kg of ghee worth Rs 534 crore, of which 68 lakh kg of adulterated ghee worth Rs 250 crore was supplied by Uttarakhand-based Bhole Baba dairy and its proxies, according to SIT findings.
Subrahmanyam is the first TTD official to be arrested. Investigators alleged he suppressed crucial lab reports confirming adulteration, enabling continued supply of spurious ghee. His arrest exposes what officials describe as an "unholy nexus" between the procurement wing and contractors.
 Former TTD chairman YV Subba Reddy said he had directed testing of dairy samples at CFTRI-Mysore in 2022 but was never informed of the results, pointing to lapses in the procurement department. ghee adulteration adulterated ghee arrest alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India TTD ghee adulteration case prov:used ghee laddu ghee adulteration case ghee fflo:hasAdulterant adulterated ghee 68 lakh kg of adulterated ghee worth Rs 250 crore was supplied testing of dairy samples fso:isPerformedAt CFTRI-Mysore directed testing of dairy samples at CFTRI-Mysore testing of dairy samples fso:isPerformedOn dairy samples testing of dairy samples TTD ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith RSSVR Subrahmanyam arrest within Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) in connection with the multi-crore laddu ghee adulteration case TTD ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba dairy supplied by Uttarakhand-based Bhole Baba dairy and its proxies Bhole Baba dairy fflo:commonIn Uttarakhand Uttarakhand-based Bhole Baba dairy TTD ghee adulteration case prov:wasAssociatedWith RSSVR Subrahmanyam taking into custody senior engineering department official RSSVR Subrahmanyam suppression of lab reports prov:wasAssociatedWith RSSVR Subrahmanyam Investigators alleged he suppressed crucial lab reports adulteration in ghee fflo:supportedBy lab reports lab reports confirming adulteration Lab confirmation of adulteration in ghee fflo:foundIn ghee confirming adulteration ghee fflo:hasAdulterant adulterant in ghee supply of spurious gheea0:Ta86,Tirumala Laddoo Adulteration Row: YSRCP Questions Transparency of Testing Under Previous Regime | VIDEO india.com The controversy over the alleged adulteration of ghee used in the preparation of the famous Tirumala Venkateswara Temple prasadam - laddoos - has escalated, with YSR Congress Party MP YV Subba Reddy raising serious questions regarding the transparency and robustness of the system during the previous administration.
Subba Reddy explained that a reliable system for quality control has been in place, irrespective of a political party in power, and that such claims of adulteration have left the devotees baffled.
The YSRCP MP, addressing the media on the adulteration row, highlighted the need to carry out testing of raw materials that go into the preparation of prasadam compulsorily.
"There was a robust system since years together, be it in any regime. The ghee tankers entering Prasadam preparation undergo mandatory lab testing, and non-compliant tankers are rejected. This procedure was followed during Chandrababu regime. then how could altered ghee enter the production?" he said.
#WATCH | Delhi | On Tirumala Prasadam laddoo adulteration row, YSRCP MP YV Subba Reddy says, "There was a robust system since years together, be it in any regime. The ghee tankers entering Prasadam preparation undergo mandatory lab testing, and non-compliant tankers are rejected.… pic.twitter.com/jY5KPSFewG
— ANI (@ANI) November 27, 2025
Subba Reddy's statement implied that if the quality control measures at place, particularly laboratory testing of ghee tankers, had been followed properly, adulterated or non-complying ghee must have been intercepted much before it reached the production line.
The MP pointed to the conflicting information now current on the incident, which he argued undermines the faith of devotees: "Contradictory statements are now being circulated, creating confusion in the minds of devotees.," he added.
Subba Reddy here refers to the longevity of the established system and the recent contradictory claims to demand accountability and clarity over this alleged lapse, especially as to why the system failed if it was robust during the time frame in question. The statement demands an end to the confusion and restoration of faith in the holy process of preparing prasadam.
Stay informed on all the latest news, real-time breaking news updates, and follow all the important headlines in india news and world news on Zee News. ghee Tirumala Laddoo adulteration alleged Tirumala, Andhra Pradesh, India Tirumala Laddoo fflo:hasIngredient ghee alleged adulteration of ghee used in the preparation of the famous Tirumala Venkateswara Temple prasadam - laddoosa1:Tafe,Indore Fake Ghee Case: Accused Tries To Fool Police About Location; Tracked & Arrested From Own House freepressjournal.in Indore (Madhya Pradesh): The man booked for preparing fake ghee, tried to fool the police by claiming he was out of the city, but was caught through his mobile tower location, police said on Wednesday. After an FIR was registered against him, police had made a phone call to him for questioning. But he told them he was in Narsinghgarh for a wedding and would come to the police station after returning to the city.
On the instruction of the district collector, an FIR was registered against Gupta at Aerodrome police station on Tuesday. When police contacted Giriraj Gupta, he lied that he was attending a wedding in Narsinghgarh with his family. But his tower location proved he was nearby.
When the team reached his house again, they found a lock on the door, vehicles parked outside and another house opposite to his house had its door open. Neighbours first claimed the family had gone to attend a wedding ceremony but when the police warned that anyone helping an accused hide would also face action, one neighbour admitted that Gupta’s daughter was inside their home.
The daughter insisted that the family was at a wedding and claimed she did not have the house key. Police told her that her father’s phone location showed he was nearby and warned her that if she did not open the lock, they would break it. After this, she took out the key and opened the door. When the house was searched, Giriraj Gupta was found hiding inside. He was arrested and taken to the police station.
Food safety officials had received a tip-off on October 30 that Giriraj Gupta, a resident of Palhar Nagar area of the city was running a fake ghee business from his house. He also has a shop in the Malharganj area. A raid was carried out at his house at Palhar Nagar on Airport Road. The team had found more than 350 wrappers of branded ghee companies hidden inside wheat containers. They also found five bottles of ghee essence in a cupboard. Six samples were taken and sent for testing. Two days ago, the Bhopal laboratory declared three of these samples substandard. ghee adulteration arrest pending_test Indore (, Madhya Pradesh, India, Indore (Madhya Pradesh) fake ghee business prov:used ghee running a fake ghee business ghee fflo:hasAdulterant ghee essence found five bottles of ghee essence fake ghee preparation prov:wasAssociatedWith Giriraj Gupta The man booked for preparing fake ghee ghee analysis fso:isPerformedOn ghee sample Six samples were taken and sent for testing ghee analysis fso:isPerformedAt Bhopal laboratory Bhopal laboratory declared three of these samples substandard ghee substandard finding fflo:foundIn ghee Bhopal laboratory declared three of these samples substandarda2:Tcd3,Couple from Mysuru held in fake Nandini ghee racket newindianexpress.com BENGALURU: The Central Crime Branch (CCB) has arrested a couple from Mysuru in connection with the racket in selling adulterated ghee under Nandini brand.
Earlier, the CCB arrested four people, including a distributor of KMF products. The couple reportedly ran a hi-tech illegal manufacturing unit in Tamil Nadu’s Tiruppur. CCB sleuths have frozen Rs 60 lakh in the bank accounts of the couple, suspecting that it could be proceeds from the crime. Investigations revealed that the accused, Shivakumar and his wife Ramya, were wanted in a case of manufacturing fake products in Mysuru.
They led a large network involved in the production of adulterated ghee and selling it. In a joint operation, the CCB and KMF’s vigilance wing arrested Mahendra, distributor of KMF products, his son Deepak, Muniraju, who supervised transportation of adulterated ghee from Tamil Nadu, and driver Abhi Arasu on November 14.
Around 8,136 litres of adulterated ghee worth Rs 1.26 crore, four vehicles, and a large quantity of coconut and palm oil were seized. The accused produced three litres of adulterated ghee using one litre of original ghee.
The accused packed adulterated ghee in sachets and plastic bottles having Nandini logo and supplied it to the Bengaluru-based distributor of KMF products. The accused also distributed adulterated ghee to wholesale and retail shops and Nandini outlets across the city.
The joint team raided godowns and shops and seized goods vehicles of Krishna Enterprises at Nanjamba Agrahara, Chamarajpet, owned by one of the accused and his family members. ghee adulteration counterfeit coconut oil palm oil arrest seizure asset_freeze alleged Mysuru, Karnataka, India adulterated ghee fflo:hasAdulterant adulterated ghee packed adulterated ghee in sachets and plastic bottles having Nandini logo Nandini ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Shivakumar accused, Shivakumar and his wife Ramya, were wanted in a case of manufacturing fake products Nandini ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Ramya accused, Shivakumar and his wife Ramya, were wanted in a case of manufacturing fake products Nandini ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Mahendra arrested Mahendra, distributor of KMF products Nandini ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Deepak arrested Mahendra, distributor of KMF products, his son Deepak Nandini ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Muniraju Muniraju, who supervised transportation of adulterated ghee Nandini ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Abhi Arasu driver Abhi Arasu on November 14 Nandini ghee adulteration act prov:used ghee racket in selling adulterated ghee under Nandini brand ghee fflo:hasAdulterant coconut oil large quantity of coconut and palm oil were seized ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil large quantity of coconut and palm oil were seized Nandini ghee adulteration act fflo:foundAt Tiruppur ran a hi-tech illegal manufacturing unit in Tamil Nadu's Tiruppur adulterated ghee fflo:foundAtStep Retail distributed adulterated ghee to wholesale and retail shops distribution of adulterated ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith Krishna Enterprises goods vehicles of Krishna Enterprises... owned by one of the accuseda3:T1785,Fake Nandini Ghee racket: Mysuru couple arrested - Star of Mysore starofmysore.com After bail, 2021 Mysuru Hosahundi ghee gang resurfaces in Tamil Nadu
Mysuru/Bengaluru: A Mysuru couple, believed to be at the centre of a large-scale counterfeit Nandini ghee racket, has been arrested by Central Crime Branch (CCB) in Bengaluru.
The accused — Shivakumar, 45 and his wife Ramya, 40 — were taken into custody yesterday as part of the ongoing investigation that earlier saw a major breakthrough on Nov. 14, when CCB sleuths raided a Chamarajpet storage facility and seized 8,136 litres of fake Nandini ghee. That raid had led to arrest of four others, including distributor Mahendra, his son Deepak and another accused, Muniraju.
2021 Mysuru case link: Notably, some of the gang members were behind massive Nandini ghee adulteration racket unearthed at Hosahundi village, at the foot of Chamundi Hill, Mysuru, on Dec. 16, 2021.
There, racketeers were found using low-grade edible oils to adulterate ghee, packing it into counterfeit Nandini sachets and pushing it into the market. Officers had seized tonnes of adulterated ghee worth crores, along with bundles of fake labels, logos, stamps and seals.
A case was then registered by Mysuru South Police Inspector Shashikumar on the directions of the then SP R. Chethan. After securing bail, Shivakumar and his associates reportedly fled Mysuru and set up a similar illegal unit in Tamil Nadu.
New fake unit in Tamil Nadu: Investigators now state that the Mysuru couple were the masterminds, running a hi-tech illegal manufacturing unit in Tiruppur, Tamil Nadu, which produced and supplied the counterfeit batches, while Mahendra’s group handled distribution through wholesale and retail channels.
CCB DCP Sriharibabu said the manufacturing hub was traced to a clandestine facility in Tiruppur. “During searches, we located a fully equipped factory where high-tech machines were being used to produce, refill and label adulterated ghee under the Nandini brand,” he said. Samples from the site will undergo forensic testing to identify the substances mixed into the product.
Police have frozen about Rs. 60 lakh across bank accounts linked to the couple. “We have provisionally attached approximately Rs. 60 lakh, and further legal action will follow,” the CCB DCP Sriharibabu added.
Tracking consignments
He said investigators are now mapping the entire distribution chain. “Our priority is to identify all members of the supply network and assess how widely these counterfeit products were circulated,” he noted, adding that officers are probing whether consignments had moved outside Karnataka.
The investigation has now expanded to multiple districts, with evidence indicating that fake ghee had reached parlours, small shops, and retail outlets across the State.
On Nov. 14, the CCB arrested distributor Mahendra, his son Deepak, transportation supervisor Muniraju and driver Abhi Arasu on Nov. 14. During that raid, officers seized 8,136 litres of adulterated ghee worth Rs. 1.26 crore, four vehicles and large quantities of coconut and palm oil.
Investigators revealed that the accused produced three litres of adulterated ghee using just one litre of original ghee, which was then packed into sachets and bottles carrying the Nandini logo. ghee fake Nandini ghee adulteration counterfeit low-grade edible oils arrest seizure asset_freezing alleged Mysuru, Karnataka, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant low-grade edible oils using low-grade edible oils to adulterate ghee low-grade edible oils fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee using low-grade edible oils to adulterate ghee fake Nandini ghee fflo:foundAt Chamarajpet storage facility raided a Chamarajpet storage facility and seized 8,136 litres of fake Nandini ghee Nandini ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Shivakumar Shivakumar, 45 and his wife Ramya, 40 — were taken into custody Nandini ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Ramya Shivakumar, 45 and his wife Ramya, 40 — were taken into custody Nandini ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Mahendra arrest of four others, including distributor Mahendra Nandini ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Deepak arrest of four others, including distributor Mahendra, his son Deepak Nandini ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Muniraju arrest of four others, including distributor Mahendra, his son Deepak and another accused, Muniraju Nandini ghee adulteration act prov:used ghee counterfeit Nandini ghee racket low-grade edible oils fflo:commonIn Hosahundi village racketeers were found using low-grade edible oils to adulterate ghee Nandini ghee adulteration in Tiruppur prov:wasAssociatedWith Mysuru couple Mysuru couple were the masterminds, running a hi-tech illegal manufacturing unit in Tiruppur Distribution of counterfeit Nandini ghee fflo:occursAt Distribution handled distribution through wholesale and retail channels adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt Retail handled distribution through wholesale and retail channels Asset freezing action fflo:issuedBy CCB Police have frozen about Rs. 60 lakh across bank accounts linked to the couple ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Mahendra CCB arrested distributor Mahendra ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Deepak arrested distributor Mahendra, his son Deepak ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Muniraju arrested distributor Mahendra, his son Deepak, transportation supervisor Muniraju ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Abhi Arasu arrested distributor Mahendra, his son Deepak, transportation supervisor Muniraju and driver Abhi Arasu ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod mixing original ghee with cheaper oils produced three litres of adulterated ghee using just one litre of original ghee mixing original ghee with cheaper oils fflo:hasFraudType Dilution produced three litres of adulterated ghee using just one litre of original ghee ghee adulteration prov:used ghee produced three litres of adulterated ghee using just one litre of original gheea4:T10ed,Industrial machines, clever repackaging: How a husband-wife duo built cross-state fake Nandini Ghee empire across Tamil Nadu, Karnataka; arrested | Bengaluru News - The Times of India indiatimes.com BENGALURU: Days after busting the fake Nandini ghee racket that stretched across Karnataka and Tamil Nadu, Central Crime Branch sleuths Wednesday arrested husband-wife duo â Shivakumar and Ramya â alleged masterminds of the large-scale distribution of the counterfeit ghee.
 A week ago, CCB sleuths, along with Karnataka Milk Federation (KMF) vigilance wing officials, had exposed the extensive counterfeit manufacturing and supply chain that attempted to exploit the reputation of state govt-owned KMF dairy brand.
CCB officials said the couple had set up an advanced production unit in Tamil Nadu, complete with industrial-grade machinery capable of mass-producing adulterated ghee. The fake product was then repackaged to look identical to genuine Nandini ghee before being pushed into markets in both states. During raids, police seized several heavy-duty machines used in the adulteration and repackaging process, indicating the scale and sophistication of the operation.
Before nabbing the masterminds, CCB had arrested four individuals linked to the racket's supply chain â KMF distributor Mahendra, his son Deepak, and associates, including Muniraju. 
The scam surfaced when unusual supply fluctuations raised red flags during internal KMF checks. Acting on a tip-off, a joint team from CCB's special investigation squad and KMF vigilance wing raided godowns, shops and vehicles linked to Krishna Enterprises in Nanjamba Agrahara, Chamarajpet, on Nov 14.
How it worked?Investigators found that Mahendra, an authorised KMF distributor, purchased original Nandini ghee in Bengaluru and shipped it to Tiruppur district in Tamil Nadu. There, the stock was diluted with palm oil, coconut oil and dalda â creating up to four litres of fake ghee for every litre of the genuine product and then diverted to Nandini booths and other grocery stores in Bengaluru. 
CCB DCP-I Sriharibabu said the arrested couple had previously been booked in Mysuru for similar offences. Police have now frozen Rs 60 lakh from their bank accounts. Samples of the adulterated ghee have been sent to Forensic Science Laboratory (FSL) for detailed analysis. Interrogation of the duo is underway to trace the wider network, including suppliers of raw materials and potential interstate collaborators. ghee adulteration counterfeit palm oil coconut oil dalda arrest freeze assets raid alleged Bengaluru, Karnataka, India counterfeit ghee fflo:foundAt Distribution large-scale distribution of the counterfeit ghee detailed analysis fso:isPerformedAt Forensic Science Laboratory Samples of the adulterated ghee have been sent to Forensic Science Laboratory (FSL) for detailed analysis fake Nandini ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Shivakumar arrested husband-wife duo â Shivakumar and Ramya â alleged masterminds fake Nandini ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Ramya arrested husband-wife duo â Shivakumar and Ramya â alleged masterminds fake Nandini ghee adulteration prov:used ghee mass-producing adulterated ghee fake Nandini ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Mahendra arrested four individuals linked to the racket's supply chain â KMF distributor Mahendra fake Nandini ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Deepak arrested four individuals linked to the racket's supply chain fake Nandini ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Muniraju associates, including Muniraju fake Nandini ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod repackaging repackaged to look identical to genuine Nandini ghee Nandini ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Mahendra Investigators found that Mahendra, an authorised KMF distributor, purchased original Nandini ghee Nandini ghee adulteration prov:used Nandini ghee purchased original Nandini ghee in Bengaluru Nandini ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod Dilution with palm oil, coconut oil and dalda stock was diluted with palm oil, coconut oil and dalda Dilution of ghee fflo:hasFraudType Dilution stock was diluted with palm oil palm oil fflo:foundAt Processing stock was diluted with palm oil, coconut oil and dalda adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt Retail diverted to Nandini booths and other grocery storesa5:Tf8f,CCB police nab kingpin couple manufacturing fake Nandini ghee thehansindia.com The City Crime Branch (CCB) has arrested a Mysuru-based couple, identified as Shivakumar and his wife Ramya, who are alleged to be the key masterminds behind the fake Nandini ghee manufacturing racket operating across Karnataka. The duo had reportedly set up a full-fledged counterfeit ghee production unit in neighbouring Tamil Nadu and were supplying fake products under the Nandini label to various parts of the state.
According to CCB DCP  Sriharibabu, the accused had installed high-capacity, hi-tech machinery and advanced equipment at their illegal unit in Tamil Nadu to manufacture and repack spurious ghee in packets bearing the Nandini branding. The machines used in the operation have been seized by the police during raids on the unit.  
This action follows the November 14 raid on a godown in Chamarajpet, Bengaluru, where CCB officials had first unearthed the racket and seized 8,136 litres of fake Nandini ghee. Those counterfeit stocks were being supplied to certain Nandini parlours and retail outlets.   
At that stage, the police had arrested distributor Mahendra, his son Deepak, and an associate Muniraju, revealing a wider distribution network.  
Subsequent investigation has now indicated that the fake ghee seized in Bengaluru was actually manufactured by Shivakumar and Ramya, and then pushed into the market through Mahendra and his network.   
Taking the probe forward, CCB has frozen around Rs 60 lakh found in the arrested couple’s bank accounts. Samples of the seized ghee have also been sent to the Forensic Science Laboratory to determine what substandard or harmful substances were mixed in the product.  
Police sources said the couple already faced a similar case earlier in Mysuru for allegedly manufacturing counterfeit products.   
Investigators are now probing whether more individuals or entities are linked to this racket and mapping out all regions where the fake Nandini ghee was supplied. The CCB is continuing intensive interrogation to dismantle the entire network and ensure such adulterated dairy products are removed from the market. ghee adulteration counterfeit mislabeling spurious ghee arrest seizure asset freeze alleged Mysuru, Karnataka, India fake Nandini ghee manufacturing prov:wasAssociatedWith Shivakumar Shivakumar and his wife Ramya, who are alleged to be the key masterminds behind the fake Nandini ghee manufacturing racket fake Nandini ghee manufacturing prov:wasAssociatedWith Ramya identified as Shivakumar and his wife Ramya, who are alleged to be the key masterminds behind the fake Nandini ghee manufacturing racket analysis of seized ghee samples fso:isPerformedAt Forensic Science Laboratory Samples of the seized ghee have also been sent to the Forensic Science Laboratory fake Nandini ghee manufacturing prov:used ghee counterfeit ghee production unit fake Nandini ghee manufacturing fflo:foundAt Tamil Nadu set up a full-fledged counterfeit ghee production unit in neighbouring Tamil Nadu fake Nandini ghee manufacturing fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling supplying fake products under the Nandini label manufacture and repack spurious ghee fflo:hasFraudType Substitution manufacture and repack spurious ghee fake Nandini ghee distribution prov:wasAssociatedWith Deepak arrested distributor Mahendra, his son Deepak fake Nandini ghee distribution prov:wasAssociatedWith Muniraju arrested distributor Mahendra, his son Deepak, and an associate Muniraju fake Nandini ghee manufacturing prov:wasAssociatedWith Shivakumar fake ghee seized in Bengaluru was actually manufactured by Shivakumar and Ramya fake Nandini ghee manufacturing prov:wasAssociatedWith Ramya fake ghee seized in Bengaluru was actually manufactured by Shivakumar and Ramya fake Nandini ghee distribution prov:wasAssociatedWith Mahendra pushed into the market through Mahendra and his network fake Nandini ghee fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy adulterated dairy productsa6:T15de,Kingpin couple arrested in Karnataka's fake ‘Nandini’ ghee racket, manufactured products in Tamil Nadu hindustantimes.com Kingpin couple arrested in Karnataka's fake ‘Nandini’ ghee racket, manufactured products in Tamil Nadu
Arrests of Ramya and husband Shivakumar came after manufacturing unit was raided by Central Crime Branch (CCB), reports said.
A couple identified as the main culprits have been arrested for manufacture and sale of ghee by illegally using the prominent brand name ‘Nandini’ of Karnataka, reports said on Wednesday, November 26, in Bengaluru.
The arrests of Ramya and her husband Shivakumar came after their manufacturing unit was raided by the Central Crime Branch (CCB) police, during which officials found large, high-tech machinery used to produce counterfeit ghee in Tamil Nadu.
The brand Nandini is owned by the Karnataka Co-operative Milk Producers' Federation (KMF), and is trusted across southern India.
The couple had allegedly been using advanced industrial equipment to manufacture fake 'Nandini' products on a large scale, officials said, as per a report in NDTV.
This comes around a week after four other people were arrested and a large network involved in producing adulterated ghee and selling them in fake 'Nandhini' packs was busted. The group produced adulterated ghee in Tamil Nadu and filled it into fake Nandini brand sachets and plastic bottles, and sold them across Bengaluru, , PTI had reported.
"Authorities have seized 8,136 litres of adulterated ghee, coconut and palm oil, ₹1.19 lakh in cash, four goods vehicles used for transportation, machinery used for manufacturing the adulterated ghee, and other related items. The total value of the seized property is approximately ₹1.27 crore," a statement issued by the office of Bengaluru Police Commissioner Seemanth Kumar Singh said.
"Understanding the high demand for Nandini ghee in Karnataka, the accused had been preparing adulterated ghee in Tamil Nadu, filling it into counterfeit Nandini sachets and plastic bottles, and supplying it to Bengaluru-based accused who held official KMF licenses," it added.
"Based on intelligence gathered secretly by the CCB (Central Crime Branch) Special Investigation Squad and KMF (Karnataka Milk Federation) Vigilance Wing officers, the operation was tracked," it said.
Team of the CCB and the KMF Vigilance Wing had conducted raids on godowns, shops, and vehicles belonging to Krishna Enterprises in Nanjamba Agrahara, Chamarajpet, owned by the main accused and their family members. During the raids, a vehicle transporting adulterated ghee was seized and the driver arrested, they said. A case was been registered at the CCB Special Investigation Division, police said.
- Follow the latest breaking news, major developments and agenda-setting stories from India and around the world with the newsdesk at Hindustan Times. Operating round the clock, the desk brings together experienced editors, reporters and correspondents to deliver fast, accurate and contextual reporting across subjects that influence public policy, governance, business, society and international affairs. The HT News Desk covers politics, elections, government policies, the economy, business and markets, science and technology, the environment, law and order, infrastructure, education, climate issues and geopolitics, while closely tracking developments across states, institutions and global capitals. The team also leads coverage of major breaking news events, policy announcements, court proceedings, natural disasters, public emergencies and significant international developments. Reports published by the newsdesk are based on information gathered from reporters on the ground, official statements, government agencies, court records, regulatory filings, recognised institutions and other authoritative sources. Stories undergo editorial scrutiny and verification processes to ensure accuracy, fairness and relevance, and are updated as events evolve and additional information becomes available. Whether covering a key political decision in New Delhi, an economic policy shift affecting millions, a landmark court ruling or a major global event, the HT News Desk aims to provide readers with reliable, fact-based journalism that delivers not only the latest developments but also the context and analysis needed to understand their wider implications.Read More ghee adulteration counterfeit adulterated ghee arrest seizure case registration alleged Bengaluru, Karnataka, India adulterated ghee fflo:hasAdulterant adulterated ghee producing adulterated ghee and selling them in fake 'Nandhini' packs ghee fflo:hasAdulterant adulterated ghee producing adulterated ghee fake Nandini ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Ramya Arrests of Ramya and husband Shivakumar came after manufacturing unit was raided fake Nandini ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Shivakumar Arrests of Ramya and husband Shivakumar came after manufacturing unit was raided fake Nandini ghee adulteration prov:used ghee manufacture and sale of ghee by illegally using the prominent brand name fake Nandini ghee adulteration fflo:hasAdulterationMethod counterfeit packaging filled it into fake Nandini brand sachets and plastic bottles manufacturing the adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt Tamil Nadu preparing adulterated ghee in Tamil Nadu Seizure of adulterated ghee fflo:foundAtStep Distribution vehicle transporting adulterated ghee was seized case registration fflo:issuedBy CCB Special Investigation Division case was been registered at the CCB Special Investigation Divisiona7:T1716,'Nandini' Ghee Racket: Who Is The Couple Behind Running Major Fake ‘Nandini’ Ghee Unit In Bengaluru newsx.com The Central Crime Branch (CCB) arrested a couple accused of running a major fake ‘Nandini’ ghee racket in Bengaluru. Officers detained Shivakumar and his wife Ramya after they identified them as key operators in the illegal manufacturing unit. Investigators said the couple produced counterfeit ghee under the Nandini brand, which belongs to the Karnataka Co-operative Milk Producers’ Federation (KMF).
The CCB conducted the arrest soon after officials uncovered the large-scale operation. The police confirmed that the couple used advanced machines to create products that looked similar to genuine Nandini ghee sold across Karnataka.
Police Seize Machines Used to Copy Genuine Nandini Ghee Packaging
Investigators said the couple set up a complete manufacturing unit to make fake Nandini ghee using high-capacity industrial equipment. During the raid, officials found machines designed to copy the texture, colour, and packaging of genuine Nandini products.
Officers seized all machinery used in the production process. The CCB stated that the couple planned to circulate the counterfeit ghee across Bengaluru to benefit from the strong demand for Nandini dairy items.
Police also confirmed that the accused used advanced methods to disguise fake ghee as original, making it difficult for consumers to identify the difference.
Network Behind Fake Ghee Supply Chain
The latest arrests followed a previous crackdown reported by PTI on November 15, when Bengaluru Police exposed a larger network involved in adulterating ghee and filling it into counterfeit Nandini sachets and bottles.
Police arrested four people in that phase of the investigation. Officers said the adulterated ghee came from Tamil Nadu, where it was prepared using other oils, then transported to Bengaluru in fake Nandini packaging.
Police confirmed that the network operated across state borders, linking production units, transport groups, and distribution points to push fake products into Karnataka’s dairy market.
Police Recover Over 8,000 Litres of Adulterated Ghee and Cash During Raids
A statement from the office of Bengaluru Police Commissioner Seemanth Kumar Singh, cited by PTI, said authorities seized 8,136 litres of adulterated ghee along with coconut and palm oil used for mixing. Police also took four goods vehicles, machinery used in the fake production process, and Rs 1.19 lakh in cash.
The total value of the seized items stood at around Rs 1.27 crore. Police said some of the accused held valid KMF licences, which allowed them to distribute the fake ghee at standard market prices. This misled consumers into believing they were buying genuine Nandini products.
The CCB Special Investigation Squad and the KMF Vigilance Wing gathered intelligence that led to coordinated raids across Bengaluru. Acting on this information, police teams searched godowns, shops, and transport vehicles connected to Krishna Enterprises in Chamarajpet, which officers identified as an important location in the racket.
During the raids, police intercepted a vehicle carrying adulterated ghee and arrested its driver. Officers filed a case with the CCB Special Investigation Division. Police said they are continuing the investigation to determine the full scope of the racket and identify others involved in the illegal distribution network.
Swastika Sruti is a Senior Sub Editor at NewsX Digital with 5 years of experience shaping stories that matter. She loves tracking politics- national and global trends, and never misses a chance to dig deeper into policies and developments. Passionate about what’s happening around us, she brings sharp insight and clarity to every piece she works on. When not curating news, she’s busy exploring what’s next in the world of public interest. You can reach her at [swastika.newsx@gmail.com] ghee adulteration counterfeit coconut and palm oil arrest seizure alleged Bengaluru, Karnataka, India adulterated ghee fflo:hasAdulterant coconut and palm oil adulterated ghee along with coconut and palm oil used for mixing Fake Nandini Ghee Manufacturing prov:used ghee produced counterfeit ghee under the Nandini brand Nandini ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod Counterfeit Packaging and Texture Replication machines designed to copy the texture, colour, and packaging Fake Nandini Ghee Manufacturing prov:wasAssociatedWith Shivakumar and Ramya arrested a couple accused of running a major fake 'Nandini' ghee racket fake ghee fflo:hasAdulterant coconut oil seized 8,136 litres of adulterated ghee along with coconut and palm oil used for mixing fake ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil seized 8,136 litres of adulterated ghee along with coconut and palm oil used for mixing coconut oil fflo:commonIn Tamil Nadu adulterated ghee came from Tamil Nadu, where it was prepared using other oils adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt Bengaluru transported to Bengaluru in fake Nandini packaging fake ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil coconut and palm oil used for mixing filling adulterated ghee into counterfeit Nandini sachets and bottles fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling filling it into counterfeit Nandini sachets and bottles fake ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod mixing with other oils used for mixing Fake Nandini Ghee Adulteration Act prov:wasAssociatedWith Krishna Enterprises connected to Krishna Enterprises in Chamarajpet, which officers identified as an important location in the racket Fake Nandini Ghee Adulteration Act prov:used ghee vehicle carrying adulterated ghee adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt Distribution intercepted a vehicle carrying adulterated ghee Adulterated Ghee fflo:foundAt Retail searched godowns, shops, and transport vehicles Fake Nandini Ghee Mislabeling Method fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling misled consumers into believing they were buying genuine Nandini productsa8:Tbc3,CCB arrests couple from Mysuru, kingpins of fake Nandini ghee racket thehindu.com Continuing investigations into the adulterated and fake Nandini ghee racket, officials of the Central Crime Branch have arrested a couple from Mysuru, kingpins of the racket, which they were allegedly running for many years now.
The CCB officials, earlier this month, raided a Krishna Enterprises in Chamarajpet, the distribution unit of adulterated ghee being sold under the Nandini brand, and arrested four, including the owner, his son, and two of his employees, for supplying the substandard products to the shops and commercial establishments.
Based on the information provided by them as to who was supplying them adulterated ghee in fake Nandini packaging, the sleuths raided a house in Mysuru and arrested the couple identified as Shivakumar, 45, and his wife Ramya, 40, who are reportedly the kingpins of the racket.
According to the police, the couple had set up a unit in Tamil Nadu, where they used substandard and adulterated products to prepare ghee on a large scale and sold it under the brand name of Nandini. The unit was also printing stickers and packaging of the Nandini brand, police said.
The couple had set up an advanced facility with an investment of several lakhs of rupees to prepare spurious products and had a network of distributors both in Karnataka and outside the state. This is not only a loss to the state exchequer but also damaging the brand name of Nandini by selling sub-standard products in its brand name, a police officer said.
The accused are habitual offenders involved in a similar case and booked by Mysuru City police last year, a police officer said. The police have freezed the couple’s bank accounts, and seized documents and other equipment to ascertain their network.
Published - November 26, 2025 07:55 pm IST ghee adulteration counterfeit substandard products arrest raid bank account freeze seizure of documents and equipment alleged Mysuru, Karnataka, India adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt Distribution distribution unit of adulterated ghee being sold Nandini ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Ramya arrested the couple identified as Shivakumar, 45, and his wife Ramya, 40, who are reportedly the kingpins of the racket Nandini ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Krishna Enterprises raided a Krishna Enterprises in Chamarajpet, the distribution unit of adulterated ghee Nandini ghee adulteration act prov:used ghee adulterated ghee being sold under the Nandini brand adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt Processing set up a unit in Tamil Nadu, where they used substandard and adulterated products to prepare ghee Nandini ghee adulteration act fflo:foundAt Tamil Nadu set up a unit in Tamil Nadu bank account freeze fflo:issuedBy Mysuru City police The police have freezed the couple's bank accounts seizure of documents and equipment fflo:issuedBy Mysuru City police The police have freezed the couple's bank accounts, and seized documents and other equipmenta9:Tb7e,Nandini ghee begins global journey as KMF launches exports | Bengaluru News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Bengaluru: The state's iconic Nandini ghee, produced by Karnataka Milk Federation (KMF), has begun its overseas journey with exports to Australia, the US and Saudi Arabia. 
Chief minister Siddaramaiah flagged off the first consignment Monday, noting that demand for the ghee has grown significantly, both domestically and internationally. The export push comes on the back of a surge in institutional and retail demand. Siddaramaiah praised KMF and US-based Mysuru native Kumar, who has secured the export agency for Nandini ghee, saying their partnership would help expand the brand's footprint abroad.
KMF has supplied a record 5,000 tonnes of ghee to Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) over the past year for use in the famous laddu prasadam â a rise of more than 30% compared to previous years. TTD's renewed tie-up with KMF followed quality concerns linked to adulterated ghee from other vendors, leading to Nandini's reinstatement as the exclusive supplier. 
Rising demand has also attracted illicit activity. Bengaluru police recently busted a counterfeit racket involving fake Nandini pouches filled with adulterated ghee, seizing 8,136 litres of tainted stock. 
Meanwhile, KMF increased retail price of ghee by Rs 90 per kg earlier this month, citing global production costs. 
The new price of Rs 700 per litre has sparked concerns among consumers. 
Nandini milk and powder is already being exported to Australia, France, UK, Germany and Saudi Arabia in tune with global standards. The federation, which produces more than 11.5 million litres of milk a day, is channelling surplus volumes to international markets. 
KMF marked a major production milestone in May 2025 when it collected 1 crore litres of milk in a single day. Analysts say this capacity supports both domestic supply and the federation's new export commitments. To sustain overseas shipments, KMF is aligning with global hygiene norms, improving packaging, expanding cold-chain logistics and strengthening certification systems. ghee adulteration counterfeit adulterated ghee busted a counterfeit racket suspected Bengaluru, Karnataka, India fake Nandini pouches fflo:hasAdulterant adulterated ghee fake Nandini pouches filled with adulterated ghee busted a counterfeit racket fflo:issuedBy Bengaluru police Bengaluru police recently busted a counterfeit racket KMF fflo:compliesWith global hygiene norms KMF is aligning with global hygiene norms Nandini ghee fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy Nandini ghee, produced by Karnataka Milk Federation filling fake Nandini pouches with adulterated ghee fflo:hasFraudType Substitution fake Nandini pouches filled with adulterated ghee counterfeit racket fflo:hasFraudType Counterfeiting busted a counterfeit racket involving fake Nandini pouches KMF fflo:compliesWith global standards in tune with global standardsaa:T1fee,Explained: How Fake Ghee Slipped Into Tirupati Devasthanam's Laddus For 5 Years swarajyamag.com When Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu claimed last year that the ghee used for Tirumala’s iconic laddu prasadam had been adulterated with animal fat, it sparked a nationwide uproar. Hindus across the world were stunned, struggling to understand how such a breach could occur.
The outrage quickly turned into a demand for accountability. How had such adulteration slipped past the TTD’s quality checks? Who had failed in their duty to safeguard the laddu’s sanctity? Accusations flew, with devotees accusing the Board of betraying the very faith it was meant to protect. Claims that the samples contained beef tallow and lard only intensified their anger.
Fingers were pointed at former chief minister Y S Jagan Mohan Reddy and his party for turning a blind eye to such adulteration. His being a Christian was also repeatedly pointed out during debates on the topic. Deputy Chief Minister Pawan Kalyan announced an eleven-day prayaschita fast and called for the formation of a national board for the protection of Sanatana Dharma.
Tempers cooled down a bit after it was found that the said samples were flagged and were not used in the preparation of laddus. Naidu’s government reverted to procuring ghee from Nandini, Karnataka’s state dairy cooperative. The Supreme Court later rebuked him, saying that it expected Gods to be kept away from politics.
While the issue slowly receded to the back of people’s minds as time passed by, question marks over the quality of laddus remained as devotees reported differences in taste and reduced shelf life.
Some even began to ask if the allegations were just a political gimmick and said that if it were so, Naidu and the Telugu Desam Party (TDP) should be taken to task for playing with the faith of crores of Hindus.
Just as these questions gained traction, the findings of a Special Investigation Team (SIT) appear to have vindicated, at least partially, the suspicion that something was seriously wrong in the temple’s ghee procurement system — though the evidence points to industrial adulteration, not animal fat.
What Did The SIT Find?
At the heart of the scandal is the discovery that between 2019 and 2024, an Uttarakhand-based firm named Bhole Baba Organic Dairy supplied over 60 lakh kilograms of fake ghee, worth nearly Rs 250 crore, to the TTD.
The firm reportedly had no milk procurement base and allegedly manufactured “ghee” using palm oil, palmolein, and chemical flavouring agents to mimic pure cow ghee.
The SIT found that this adulterated material was used in the temple’s kitchens for years — turning what devotees consider sacred into the centre of a sprawling corruption case.
How Was The ‘Milkless Ghee’ Manufactured?
The production line reportedly began with refined palm oil and palm kernel oil (and in some cases palmolein), which were melted and thickened with hydrogenated fat.
To this were added chemical additives—beta-carotene to simulate the golden colour of real ghee; ghee essence/flavour for aroma; mono- and diglycerides, and acetic-acid esters to boost laboratory values (especially the Reichert–Meissl test which checks for short-chain fatty acids in genuine ghee) and mimic the texture and mouthfeel of dairy-based ghee.
Once that synthetic mixture was manufactured, the scheme used a network of proxy dairies—Vyshnavi Dairy Specialities Pvt Ltd, Mal Ganga Milk & Agro Products Pvt Ltd and AR Dairy Foods Pvt Ltd, which re-labelled or re-tankered the product and created false invoices/e-way bills and documents to present it as genuine desi cow-ghee.
On occasion, rejected consignments (such as four tanker loads in July 2024 flagged for adulteration) were allegedly re-labelled and re-supplied to TTD via different routes rather than destroyed.
But the chemistry was only one part of the story. The procurement system and its political oversight raised even more troubling questions.
Did The YSRCP Have A Role As Alleged?
What makes the case politically explosive is that the supplies in question correspond largely to the period when the YSR Congress Party (YSRCP) governed Andhra Pradesh (2019–24).
According to the SIT, Bhole Baba continued to win contracts even after being blacklisted in 2022, allegedly by routing supplies through the aforementioned proxy firms. Critics from the present government argue that this persistence was possible only through collusion within the temple administration and political protection from the YSRCP leadership.
Among the most serious allegations are those involving Y V Subba Reddy, former TTD chairman and a senior YSRCP parliamentarian. The SIT has uncovered a money trail of Rs 50 lakh linked to Reddy’s personal assistant, Chinna Appanna, who was arrested on 30 October. The cash was reportedly moved through hawala channels.
Who Else Are Under The SIT’s Radar?
Once the SIT cracked open the Bhole Baba link and arrested its directors, Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain, a chain of arrests followed, pulling in players across the proxy-supplier ecosystem.
Among those taken into custody were Apoorva Vinay Kant Chawda (CEO of Vyshnavi Dairy) and Raju Rajasekharan (managing director of AR Dairy), the two firms accused of re-routing rejected consignments and camouflaging their origin through falsified documentation.
Soon after, Delhi-based chemical trader Ajay Kumar Sugandh was taken into custody for supplying the emulsifiers, stabilisers and flavouring agents that gave the fake ghee its deceptive resemblance to real ghee.
What Next?
The investigation by the SIT is still underway. The latest to be questioned is AV Dharma Reddy, a former additional executive officer of the temple. The police are also on the lookout for Karimulla, a manager of Bhole Baba dairy and Chawda’s son-in-law.
Also Read: Sabarimala Gold Theft: How Temple Officials Enabled A Priest To Strip Sacred Idols And Walk Away
S Rajesh is Staff Writer at Swarajya. He tweets @rajesh_srn. ghee adulteration substitution palm oil palmolein chemical flavouring agents ghee essence arrests alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India SIT findings fflo:foundIn ghee findings of a Special Investigation Team (SIT) appear to have vindicated, at least partially, the suspicion that something was seriously wrong in the temple’s ghee procurement system — though the evidence points to industrial adulteration, not animal fat. ghee essence fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee ghee essence/flavour for aroma ghee fflo:hasAdulterant beef tallow Claims that the samples contained beef tallow fake ghee supply to TTD prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Bhole Baba Organic Dairy supplied over 60 lakh kilograms of fake ghee industrial adulteration fflo:hasFraudType Substitution supplied over 60 lakh kilograms of fake ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod Synthetic Ghee Manufacturing production line reportedly began with refined palm oil and palm kernel oil Synthetic Ghee Manufacturing fflo:hasFraudType Substitution mimic pure cow ghee Fake Ghee Adulteration Act prov:wasAssociatedWith Vyshnavi Dairy Specialities Pvt Ltd network of proxy dairies—Vyshnavi Dairy Specialities Pvt Ltd Fake Ghee Adulteration Act prov:wasAssociatedWith Vyshnavi Dairy Specialities Pvt Ltd scheme used a network of proxy dairies—Vyshnavi Dairy Specialities Pvt Ltd False Documentation fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling re-labelled or re-tankered the product Adulteration of ghee at TTD prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Bhole Baba continued to win contracts even after being blacklisted Bhole Baba Adulteration Act prov:wasAssociatedWith Pomil Jain arrested its directors, Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain Bhole Baba Adulteration Act prov:wasAssociatedWith Vipin Jain arrested its directors, Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain AR Dairy Adulteration Act prov:wasAssociatedWith Raju Rajasekharan Raju Rajasekharan (managing director of AR Dairy), the two firms accused of re-routing rejected consignments Fake Ghee Adulteration Act prov:wasAssociatedWith Ajay Kumar Sugandh Ajay Kumar Sugandh was taken into custody for supplying the emulsifiersab:T12e8,Tirumala laddu ghee adulteration case reveals shocking details siasat.com Hyderabad: The Special Investigation Team (SIT) of the Central Bureau of Investigation probing the Tirumala laddu ghee adulteration case revealed that nearly 20.1 crore laddus out of the 48.76 crore prepared between 2019 and 2024 were made using substandard or adulterated ghee.
The scandal came to light in September 2024, when Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu accused the previous government of allowing the use of adulterated ghee containing animal fat in TTD laddu production. Following the revelation, a SIT under court supervision is investigating one of the biggest rackets and the probe reveals shocking details.
According to Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) Trust Board chairman B.R., these laddus were consumed by around 11 crore pilgrims during their visit to the Sri Venkateswara temple during the period between 2019 and 2024. Ironically, VVIPs visiting the temple received the same laddus as the common man, making it impossible to identify who may have unknowingly received the adulterated prasadam.
The SIT investigations point out that approximately 68 lakh kilograms of adulterated ghee, valued at around Rs 250 crore, was supplied by Bhole Baba Dairy of Uttarakhand and a network of shell companies linked to it. The ghee was allegedly diluted with palm oil, palm kernel oil and other inferior ingredients.
In the course of the investigation, the SIT questioned former TTD chairman and YSRCP MP Y.V. Subba Reddy for nearly eight hours recently. According to reports, when confronted with lab reports pointing to adulterated ghee, he reportedly said the findings “were never placed before him” and that procurement decisions were made based on recommendations from the technical committee, as per reports. His former assistant, Chinna Appanna, has been arrested in connection with the case previously. Former Executive Officer A.V. Dharma Reddy has also been questioned.
The SIT had recently arrested Delhi-based chemical trader Ajay Kumar Sugandha for his alleged role in supplying chemicals used to prepare fake ghee. Ajay Kumar is cited as A-16 in the case, and allegedly worked with Bholebaba Dairy directors Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain for several years, providing key chemical components used to adulterate ghee supplied to the TTD under private dairy labels.
According to SIT officials, the trader had been supplying monoglycerides, acetic acid, and esters, substances used in palm oil processing, to Bholebaba Dairy for nearly seven years. These chemicals, imported from South Korea and distributed through a Delhi-based network, were bought under Ajay Kumar’s company name and forwarded to the dairy’s production units.
The adulterated ghee was distributed under the brand names Vaishnavi and AR Dairy, and later used in the sacred Tirupati laddus.
Laboratory tests conducted by forensic teams confirmed the presence of synthetic compounds inconsistent with dairy-based ghee.
As the SIT probe continues, it is to be seen how many more heads will roll in one of the biggest temple scams in the country. ghee adulteration animal fat palm oil palm kernel oil investigation arrest alleged Tirumala, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat adulterated ghee containing animal fat ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil ghee was allegedly diluted with palm oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm kernel oil ghee was allegedly diluted with palm oil, palm kernel oil ghee dilution with palm oil fflo:hasFraudType Dilution ghee was allegedly diluted with palm oil ghee adulteration method fflo:hasFraudType Dilution ghee was allegedly diluted with palm oil ghee adulteration at TTD prov:wasAssociatedWith Ajay Kumar Sugandha arrested Delhi-based chemical trader Ajay Kumar Sugandha for his alleged role in supplying chemicals used to prepare fake ghee ghee adulteration at TTD prov:wasAssociatedWith Pomil Jain worked with Bholebaba Dairy directors Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain ghee adulteration at TTD prov:wasAssociatedWith Vipin Jain worked with Bholebaba Dairy directors Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain ghee fflo:hasAdulterant acetic acid supplying monoglycerides, acetic acid, and esters, substances used in palm oil processing ghee fflo:hasAdulterant esters supplying monoglycerides, acetic acid, and esters, substances used in palm oil processing Ajay Kumar Sugandha prov:wasAssociatedWith Bholebaba Dairy worked with Bholebaba Dairy directors Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain Tirupati laddus fkg:hasIngredient ghee used in the sacred Tirupati laddus LabConfirmedFinding fflo:identifies synthetic compounds Laboratory tests conducted by forensic teams confirmed the presence of synthetic compounds LabConfirmedFinding fflo:foundIn ghee confirmed the presence of synthetic compounds inconsistent with dairy-based gheeac:T10d1,SIT uncovers massive ghee adulteration! thehansindia.com Tirupati: The disclosure that nearly 20 crore Tirumala laddus were made using adulterated ghee over five years has emerged as the most disturbing finding in the CBI-monitored inquiry into food-quality violations at the world-renowned hill shrine. The Special Investigation Team (SIT) has concluded that spurious ghee infiltrated the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) supply chain between 2019 and 2024, directly affecting laddus offered to crores of devotees.
Officials familiar with the probe say the SIT has identified 68 lakh kg of substandard ghee, allegedly mixed with palm oil, palm-kernel derivatives and other additives. This stock alone was used in preparing about 20.1 crore laddus out of the 48.76 crore distributed during the period in question. These laddus reached 10.97 crore devotees who visited the temple between June 2019 and June 2024.  
A preliminary probe led by DIG Sarvashresth Tripathi pointed to dubious procurement patterns, and the matter reached the Supreme Court. The apex court subsequently handed the case over to a five-member CBI-led SIT.  
The team examined a large volume of records, including Potu (temple kitchen) logs, procurement documents, distribution data, material movement registers and daily footfall statistics. Investigators found that during the five-year period, TTD purchased 1.61 crore kg of ghee worth Rs 534.7 crore, of which nearly Rs 250 crore worth was supplied by Bhole Baba Dairy in Uttarakhand and its proxy entities, now suspected to be responsible for the adulterated stock  
The Potu in Tirumala, where the traditional recipe of Bengal gram flour, sugar, cardamom and dry fruits mixed with premium ghee has remained largely unchanged for decades, produces around 3.5 lakh laddus every day, using 11,500 kg of ghee daily, each containing roughly 33 grams of ghee. When this average is scaled to the 48.76 crore laddus made over five years, the numbers line up almost perfectly with the 1.61 crore kg of ghee that were bought.  
This one-to-one match allowed investigators to estimate how many laddus may have been touched by the tainted ghee, with procurement logs and kitchen consumption telling the same story. The investigators have also concluded that it is impossible to identify which batches reached devotees and which were prepared using authentic ghee. ghee adulteration palm oil investigation alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil substandard ghee, allegedly mixed with palm oil laddu fflo:hasAdulterant tainted ghee estimate how many laddus may have been touched by the tainted ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm-kernel derivatives mixed with palm oil, palm-kernel derivatives ghee adulteration finding prov:wasAttributedTo Bhole Baba Dairy supplied by Bhole Baba Dairy... suspected to be responsible for the adulterated stock ghee adulteration finding fflo:foundIn laddus 20 crore Tirumala laddus were made using adulterated ghee ghee adulteration finding fflo:foundAtStep Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams supply chain spurious ghee infiltrated the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) supply chain ghee adulteration finding fflo:inRegion Tirupati Tirupati: The disclosure that nearly 20 crore Tirumala laddus ghee adulteration finding fflo:identifies palm oil identified 68 lakh kg of substandard ghee, allegedly mixed with palm oil ghee adulteration finding fflo:identifies palm-kernel derivatives allegedly mixed with palm oil, palm-kernel derivatives laddu fkg:hasIngredient Bengal gram flour traditional recipe of Bengal gram flour, sugar, cardamom and dry fruits mixed with premium ghee laddu fkg:hasIngredient sugar traditional recipe of Bengal gram flour, sugar, cardamom and dry fruits mixed with premium ghee laddu fkg:hasIngredient cardamom traditional recipe of Bengal gram flour, sugar, cardamom and dry fruits mixed with premium ghee laddu fkg:hasIngredient dry fruits traditional recipe of Bengal gram flour, sugar, cardamom and dry fruits mixed with premium ghee laddu fkg:hasIngredient ghee traditional recipe of Bengal gram flour, sugar, cardamom and dry fruits mixed with premium ghee laddus fkg:hasIngredient ghee traditional recipe of Bengal gram flour, sugar, cardamom and dry fruits mixed with premium gheead:T9a2,SIT grills Subba Reddy in ghee adulteration probe thehansindia.com Vijayawada: A Special Investigation Team (SIT) on Thursday questioned former Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) chairman Y V Subba Reddy in Hyderabad in connection with the alleged supply of adulterated ghee used in the preparation of Tirumala’s famed Srivari laddu. The interrogation took place at his residence, following prior notices issued by the SIT. 
The investigation team, comprising an Additional SP, a DSP and an inspector, questioned Subba Reddy based on statements earlier given by his former personal assistant Chinna Appanna, former TTD executive officer A V Dharma Reddy and several senior officials. The officials had been examined in the past weeks after the SIT traced irregularities in ghee sourcing during the relevant period.  
Sources said the SIT brought several key documents to Hyderabad, including procurement records and internal correspondence, and confronted Subba Reddy with this material. Officers are probing the decision-making process behind ghee procurement and the role of intermediaries.  
According to the SIT, substantial evidence has already been collected indicating that adulterated ghee tankers were supplied to TTD during Subba Reddy’s tenure. Appanna, listed as A-24 in the case, is accused of facilitating the supply of substandard ghee through Premier Dairy and allegedly bribing officials on two occasions to clear the consignments. These findings have been submitted to the Nellore ACB Court.  
SIT officials are now examining whether the recommendations made by Appanna influenced procurement decisions and what connections existed between him and other dairy suppliers. The SIT is also verifying whether systemic lapses in quality checks enabled adulterated consignments to pass through TTD’s supply chain. With the latest round of questioning, key details related to the broader adulteration network continue to emerge, and officials indicated that more interrogations are likely as the investigation progresses. ghee adulteration adulterated ghee questioning investigation alleged Hyderabad, Telangana, India adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt TTD adulterated ghee tankers were supplied to TTD supply of substandard ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith Chinna Appanna Appanna... is accused of facilitating the supply of substandard ghee SIT finding of adulterated ghee supply fflo:foundAtStep Distribution adulterated ghee tankers were supplied to TTDae:Tbdb,SIT to grill TTD Chairman YV Subba Reddy in ghee case in Hyderabad today newindianexpress.com TIRUPATI: The investigation into the TTD laddu ghee adulteration scandal has reached a critical juncture, with the Supreme Court-appointed Special Investigation Team (SIT) preparing a questionnaire to ask former Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) Chairman YV Subba Reddy.
The SIT, comprising an Additional Superintendent of Police (ASP), a Deputy Superintendent of Police (DSP), and an Inspector, is scheduled to visit Hyderabad on Thursday to interrogate Subba Reddy at his residence.
Responding to an earlier notice of SIT, Subba Reddy confirmed his availability on November 20 for questioning. The SIT has already gathered substantial evidence indicating that adulterated ghee was supplied during his tenure, allegedly facilitated by Chinna Appanna, A-24, in the ghee adulteration case.
Appanna, a former personal assistant to Subba Reddy, is accused of orchestrating the supply of adulterated ghee tankers through Premier Dairy and reportedly bribed officials on two occasions.
These details have been submitted to the Nellore Anti-Corruption Bureau (ACB) Court.
The SIT aims to investigate the nature of recommendations made by Appanna and his connections with other dairy companies.
On Day 3 of his custodial interrogation at the Alipiri office of SIT, Appanna was questioned about his financial transactions, alleged favors to dairy firms, and whether Subba Reddy was aware of these dealings.
Meanwhile, in a separate but equally sensational case—the TTD Parakamani case—the AP CID SIT is analysing WhatsApp chats and mobile call data logs of all suspects, including the accused, Ravi Kumar. The CID’s technical team is working to uncover potential leads from the digital evidence.
The CID investigation team, currently based in Vijayawada, is expected to arrive in Tirupati later this week, led by Director General, CID Ravi Sankar Ayyanar. Their temporary camp office at Sri Padmavathi Guest House has been vacated pending further developments.
TTD officials are deliberating whether to file a fresh complaint regarding the Parakamani scam, either at Tirumala I-Town Police Station or directly with the CID SIT.
However, a senior Tirupati district police officer told TNIE that the matter is under the AP High Court’s jurisdiction, especially given the suspicious death of the then TTD Assistant Vigilance and Security Officer (AVSO) Satish Kumar, which is under CID scrutiny.
The officer added that any new complaint would require clearance from the HC. ghee adulteration adulterated ghee interrogation investigation alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India supply of adulterated ghee tankers prov:wasAssociatedWith Premier Dairy supply of adulterated ghee tankers through Premier Dairy TTD laddu ghee adulteration scandal prov:wasAttributedTo YV Subba Reddy investigation into the TTD laddu ghee adulteration scandal Chinna Appanna fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional orchestrating the supply of adulterated gheeaf:T9f8,Ghee Adulteration: SIT Begins Questioning Of Chinna Appanna deccanchronicle.com Appanna was brought to the SIT office in Tirupati on Monday after the Nellore ACB Court granted five days’ custody to the investigation team.
TIRUPATI: The Special Investigation Team has begun questioning Kaduru Chinna Appanna, the former personal assistant of ex-TTD chairman and YSRC MP, Y.V. Subba Reddy, in the Tirumala ghee adulteration case.
Appanna was brought to the SIT office in Tirupati on Monday after the Nellore ACB Court granted five days’ custody to the investigation team.
Appanna was arrested on October 30 as Accused No. 24. He allegedly played a key role in the ghee procurement process and influenced the contractors. He maintained regular contact with the suppliers and received kickbacks, as per the charges read against him in the court.
Appanna is suspected to have demanded a commission from Bhole Baba Dairy, one of the suppliers. When the company did not agree to this, he reportedly pushed for a second quality inspection that led to the firm’s disqualification. The contract was later awarded to another supplier at a higher price.
The SIT believes Appanna benefited financially from the process. He likely received about `50 lakh through hawala channels in multiple installments, the court was told.
The SIT said it would question him to gather clarity on how the contracts were handled, his communication with the suppliers and the financial transactions linked to the case. The inquiry also aims to establish how adulterated ghee was supplied for preparing the Tirumala laddu prasadam and whether lapses occurred due to negligence or deliberate involvement of individuals.
The questioning would continue until November 21. ghee adulteration substitution contamination custody_granted questioning alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India Tirumala ghee adulteration case prov:used ghee Tirumala ghee adulteration case Tirumala laddu prasadam fkg:hasIngredient ghee adulterated ghee was supplied for preparing the Tirumala laddu prasadam Kaduru Chinna Appanna prov:wasAssociatedWith Tirumala ghee adulteration case questioning Kaduru Chinna Appanna... in the Tirumala ghee adulteration case Kaduru Chinna Appanna prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba Dairy suspected to have demanded a commission from Bhole Baba Dairy Tirumala ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Kaduru Chinna Appanna SIT believes Appanna benefited financially from the process Tirumala ghee adulteration case prov:used ghee how adulterated ghee was suppliedb0:Tfab,Fake Nandini ghee racket busted in Bengaluru; dip in orders exposed accused indiatoday.in Fake Nandini ghee racket busted in Bengaluru; dip in orders exposed accused
Karnataka Milk Federation officials busted a fake ghee racket run by an authorised distributor in Bengaluru. The distributor allegedly diluted genuine Nandini ghee with palm oil and sold it to parlours.
A fake ghee racket supplying products to Nandini dairy parlours across Bengaluru has been busted, with officials uncovering an adulteration network run by an authorised distributor.
Investigations revealed that the group produced adulterated ghee in Tamil Nadu, filled it into counterfeit Nandini sachets and plastic bottles, and supplied it to accused in Bengaluru who held official Karnataka Milk Federation (KMF) licences. These distributors then sold the fake ghee to wholesale shops, retail outlets, and Nandini parlours at full market price.
SUSPICIOUSLY REDUCED ORDER
The scam came to light after KMF officials noticed something unusual: Mahendra, an official KMF dealer-cum-distributor who regularly placed large ghee orders, suddenly began cutting down his purchases. Instead of his usual 100 litres, he had been ordering just 50 litres in recent months, raising red flags.
Inspections revealed why. Mahendra, the key accused, had allegedly been mixing palm oil and other fats with genuine Nandini ghee, turning 1 litre of real ghee into 5 litres of adulterated product. This fake ghee was then supplied to Nandini parlours across the city.
A joint operation by the City Crime Branch (CCB) Special Investigation Squad and KMF Vigilance Wing, acting on secretly gathered intelligence, tracked the network.
On Friday, teams raided godowns, shops, and goods vehicles belonging to Krishna Enterprises in Chamarajpet, owned by Mahendra, and his family. A vehicle transporting adulterated ghee was seized and the driver arrested.
KMF Vigilance later expanded the probe, exposing the full scope of Mahendra’s operation. According to sources, he allegedly resorted to adulteration to raise money for his daughter’s wedding.
“Four accused have been arrested so far. Authorities have seized 8,136 litres of adulterated ghee, coconut and palm oil, Rs 1.19 lakh in cash, four goods vehicles, machinery used for manufacturing the adulterated ghee, and other related items. The total value of the seized property is approximately Rs 1.27 crore,” the office of Bengaluru Police Commissioner Seemanth Kumar Singh said in a statement. ghee adulteration counterfeit palm oil raid arrest seizure alleged Bengaluru, Karnataka, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil diluted genuine Nandini ghee with palm oil Fake Nandini ghee racket busted fflo:inRegion Bengaluru Fake Nandini ghee racket busted in Bengaluru ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil mixing palm oil and other fats with genuine Nandini ghee Nandini ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Mahendra Mahendra, an official KMF dealer-cum-distributor who regularly placed large ghee orders Nandini ghee adulteration prov:used ghee distributor allegedly diluted genuine Nandini ghee Nandini ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod Dilution with palm oil diluted genuine Nandini ghee with palm oil Dilution with palm oil fflo:hasFraudType Dilution diluted genuine Nandini ghee with palm oil palm oil fflo:commonIn Tamil Nadu group produced adulterated ghee in Tamil Nadu Nandini ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Mahendra Mahendra, the key accused, had allegedly been mixing palm oil Nandini ghee adulteration prov:used ghee mixing palm oil and other fats with genuine Nandini ghee mixing palm oil and other fats with genuine Nandini ghee fflo:hasFraudType Dilution turning 1 litre of real ghee into 5 litres of adulterated product palm oil fflo:foundAt Retail supplied to Nandini parlours across the city palm oil fflo:foundAt Storage teams raided godowns, shops, and goods vehicles seizure of adulterated ghee fflo:foundAtStep Distribution A vehicle transporting adulterated ghee was seizedb1:T12bb,Bengaluru Distributor Busted For Selling Diluted 'Nandini' Ghee In Fake Racket, What We Know So Far newsx.com Bengaluru Police have busted a fake ghee racket, in collaboration with the Karnataka Milk Federation, involving adulterated products being sold in the name of one of Karnataka’s most trusted dairy brands, Nandini. The racket was said to be operated by an authorised KMF distributor named Mahendra, who mixes genuine ghee with palm oil and other cheap fats and sells it to parlours, wholesale shops, and retail outlets across the city.
The scam came to light after officials from KMF found out Mahendra’s orders for ghee suddenly had come down from 100 litres every month to 50 litres. A deeper look revealed that one litre of genuine Nandini ghee was allegedly being made into almost five litres of spurious ghee, which was then packed in fake sachets and plastic bottles.
Where was adulterated ghee manufactured?
Investigations revealed that the adulterated ghee was being manufactured in Tamil Nadu and transported to Bengaluru for distribution. Acting on secret intelligence, a joint operation by CCB Special Investigation Squad and KMF Vigilance Wing raided Krishna Enterprises in Chamarajpet – the supply hub run by Mahendra and his family.
During the raids, police intercepted a vehicle carrying the adulterated ghee and arrested its driver. Samples recovered are also being tested to determine whether animal fats were mixed in along with poor-grade palm oil and coconut oil.
A tale of ghee scam
The authorities seized 8,136 litres of adulterated ghee, machinery to manufacture the spurious product, palm and coconut oils, five mobile phones, four Bolero goods vehicles, and cash amounting to Rs 1.19 lakh. The estimated value of the seized property stands at around Rs 1.27 crore.
Sources say that Mahendra allegedly resorted to adulteration in order to raise money for his daughter’s wedding. In this connection, the police have arrested four persons, including Mahendra, his son Deepak, and associates Muniraju and Abhiarasu. Tests are being conducted at the Forensic Science Laboratory to ascertain the full extent of adulteration.
A case has been registered under the CCB Special Investigation Division, and further investigations are on. The racket has sparked concerns over food safety and consumer trust in Bengaluru, with Nandini remaining a household dairy brand across Karnataka. The authorities have promised stringent action to prevent further adulteration and are stepping up checks across the supply chain.
ALSO READ: CNG Crisis Hits Mumbai; Pipeline Damage Sparks Long Queues
Sofia Babu Chacko is a journalist with over five years of experience reporting on Indian politics, crime, human rights, gender issues, and stories about marginalized communities. She believes journalism plays a crucial role in amplifying unheard voices and bringing attention to issues that truly matter. Sofia has contributed articles to The New Indian Express, Youth Ki Awaaz, and Maktoob Media. She is also a recipient of the 2025 Laadli Media Awards for gender sensitivity. Beyond the newsroom, she is a music enthusiast who enjoys singing. Connect with Sofia on X: https://x.com/SBCism ghee adulteration palm oil cheap fats raid arrest seizure alleged Bengaluru, Karnataka, India palm oil fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee mixes genuine ghee with palm oil and other cheap fats ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil mixes genuine ghee with palm oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant cheap fats mixes genuine ghee with palm oil and other cheap fats Nandini Ghee Adulteration Act prov:wasAssociatedWith Mahendra operated by an authorised KMF distributor named Mahendra Nandini Ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod Mixing with palm oil and cheap fats mixes genuine ghee with palm oil and other cheap fats palm oil fflo:foundAt Processing adulterated ghee was being manufactured in Tamil Nadu ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil animal fats were mixed in along with poor-grade palm oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant coconut oil mixed in along with poor-grade palm oil and coconut oil ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Mahendra Mahendra allegedly resorted to adulteration ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Deepak arrested four persons, including Mahendra, his son Deepak ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Muniraju arrested four persons, including Mahendra, his son Deepak, and associates Muniraju and Abhiarasu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Abhiarasu arrested four persons, including Mahendra, his son Deepak, and associates Muniraju and Abhiarasu Tests on ghee samples fso:isPerformedAt Forensic Science Laboratory Tests are being conducted at the Forensic Science Laboratory ghee adulteration finding fflo:inRegion Bengaluru concerns over food safety and consumer trust in Bengalurub2:T688,SIT summons Y.V. Subba Reddy aide  in TTD ghee adulteration case thehindu.com T
Kaduru Chinna Appanna, a close aide and assistant of Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) former Chairman Y.V. Subba Reddy, has been summoned by the Special Investigation Team (SIT) which is currently probing the Tirumala laddu ghee adulteration case.
Appanna is the 24th accused in the case and was arrested by SIT on October 30. He has been on judicial remand since then.
The Nellore ACB court has granted permission to the SIT to take Appanna into custody for questioning, following which the team has issued summons to him to appear for questioning for five days starting Monday.
According to the investigating agency, Appanna had colluded with the contractors tendered to supply ghee, which led to the supply of adulterated ghee to the TTD for preparation of the famous ‘Srivari Laddu Prasadam’. He was also charged of having received ₹50 lakh as kickbacks through hawala channels.
Published - November 16, 2025 08:00 pm IST ghee adulteration summons arrest alleged Tirumala, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India TTD ghee adulteration case fflo:triggeredAction SIT summons SIT summons Y.V. Subba Reddy aide in TTD ghee adulteration case TTD ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith T Kaduru Chinna Appanna Appanna had colluded with the contractors tendered to supply ghee TTD ghee adulteration case prov:used ghee supply of adulterated ghee to the TTD Srivari Laddu Prasadam fkg:hasIngredient ghee supply of adulterated ghee to the TTD for preparation of the famous 'Srivari Laddu Prasadam' TTD ghee adulteration case fflo:triggeredAction arrest of Appanna arrested by SIT on October 30b3:T10a5,CCB busts massive adulterated ghee racket; fake Nandini products worth Rs 1.26 crore seized in Bengaluru newindianexpress.com BENGALURU: A large network producing adulterated ghee in Tamil Nadu, filling it into fake Nandini-branded sachets and plastic bottles and selling it across Bengaluru has been busted in a joint operation conducted by Central Crime Branch (CCB) sleuths and KMF Vigilance Wing.
Four accused, including a KMF distributor, his son and two others, have been arrested. Whopping 8,136 litre of adulterated ghee worth Rs 1.26 crore, four vehicles used to supply the item, machinery to prepare the ghee and large quantities of coconut and palm oil that were used to adulterate the ghee were seized. The accused were producing three litres of adulterated ghee from one litre of original ghee.
The ghee was supplied to a dealer in Bengaluru who held official KMF licences. He and his family then distributed the adulterated ghee to various wholesale and retail shops and Nandini parlours across the city, selling it at the actual market price.
KMF Managing Director B Shivaswamy said one of the accused is a KMF dealer.
Coconut, palm oil used for adulteration
The operation was tracked down by CCB Special Investigation Squad and KMF Vigilance Wing officers, who gathered specific intelligence and conducted raids.
The arrested persons are identified as Mahendra, a KMF distributor, his son Deepak, Muniraju, who was transporting adulterated ghee from Tamil Nadu, and Abhi Arasu, the driver. The joint team raided godowns, shops and goods vehicles belonging to Krishna Enterprises in Nanjamba Agrahara, Chamarajpet, owned by one of the accused and his family members.
During the raid, a vehicle transporting adulterated ghee from Tamil Nadu was seized along with the driver Arasu.
Five mobile phones, four goods vehicles worth Rs 60 lakh, Rs 1.19 lakh in cash, fake Nandini branded sachets and bottles filled with 8,136 litre of adulterated ghee, cans filled with coconut and palm oil used for adulteration were recovered.
“We received specific information from the KMF vigilance wing. The unit where the adulterated ghee was being produced was located in Tiruppur district of Tamil Nadu. Information about the main accused is being gathered. The accused were active for the last two years,” Bengaluru Police Commissioner Seemant Kumar Singh said. ghee adulteration coconut oil palm oil arrest seizure alleged Bengaluru, Karnataka, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant coconut oil coconut and palm oil that were used to adulterate the ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil coconut and palm oil that were used to adulterate the ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod dilution with cheaper oils producing three litres of adulterated ghee from one litre of original ghee dilution with cheaper oils fflo:hasFraudType Dilution producing three litres of adulterated ghee from one litre of original ghee distribution of adulterated ghee fflo:occursAt Distribution distributed the adulterated ghee to various wholesale and retail shops ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith KMF distributor one of the accused is a KMF dealer ghee adulteration act prov:used ghee producing adulterated ghee ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith KMF distributor Four accused, including a KMF distributor ghee fflo:hasAdulterant coconut oil cans filled with coconut and palm oil used for adulteration ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil cans filled with coconut and palm oil used for adulteration ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Mahendra The arrested persons are identified as Mahendra, a KMF distributor ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Deepak The arrested persons are identified as Mahendra, a KMF distributor, his son Deepak ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Abhi Arasu Abhi Arasu, the driver coconut oil fflo:commonIn Tiruppur district cans filled with coconut and palm oil used for adulteration were recovered adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt Distribution Muniraju, who was transporting adulterated ghee from Tamil Nadu ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Krishna Enterprises goods vehicles belonging to Krishna Enterprises... owned by one of the accused adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt Storage The joint team raided godownsb4:T10a1,Lawyer moves NHRC over Tirupati ghee scandal, calls it ‘national betrayal of faith’ hindustantimes.com Lawyer moves NHRC over Tirupati ghee scandal, calls it ‘national betrayal of faith’
Adulterated ghee was used to make prasadam for lakhs of devotees, which constituted “a national betrayal of faith”, advocate Hitendra Gandhi said in his complaint, urging the NHRC to “safeguard the health, faith, and dignity of millions of citizens”
MUMBAI: A Mumbai-based advocate has urged the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) to take suo motu cognisance of the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) ghee scandal, wherein 68 lakh kilograms of allegedly adulterated ghee was supplied to the temple over five years. The adulterated ghee was used to make prasadam for lakhs of devotees, which constituted “a national betrayal of faith”, advocate Hitendra Gandhi said in his complaint, urging the NHRC to “safeguard the health, faith, and dignity of millions of citizens”.
“This is just not about one trust, one state, or one religion. To allow deceit and corruption in this space is to turn worship into a transaction and holiness into a hazard. NHRC’s intervention is necessary to punish the wrongdoers,” Gandhi said in his complaint filed with the NHRC on Tuesday.
The controversy over supply of adulterated ghee to the temple was sparked in September last year when Andhra Pradesh chief minister N Chandrababu Naidu accused his predecessor, YS Jagan Mohan Reddy, of permitting the use of substandard ingredients and animal fat in the ghee used to make prasadam at the temple. Naidu cited a lab report from the National Dairy Development Board, which purportedly confirmed the presence of beef tallow, fish oil, and lard in the ghee supplied to the temple.
Gandhi, in his complaint, referred to recent investigation reports, which confirmed that a Hardiwar-based company, Bhole Baba Dairy Pvt Ltd, had supplied nearly 68 lakh kilograms of spurious, industrial-grade ghee to the TTD between 2019 and 2024. The Special Investigation Team (SIT) that investigated the case initially as well as the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) had unearthed forged FSSAI licences, tampered e-way bills, falsified invoices, and counterfeit labels that pointed towards an organised supply-chain conspiracy operating under the temple’s procurement system, Gandhi alleged.
“This was not an act of negligence. It was a carefully engineered betrayal, committed against the faith of devotees from every Indian state and over 150 countries worldwide who visit Tirupati each year believing in the purity of its sacred food,” Gandhi noted in the complaint.
The “systematic adulteration” violated Articles 14, 21 and 25 of the Constitution, which forbid selective indifference to food safety when consumed in faith, and guarantee the right of citizens to safe food and to worship in purity, not deceit, the complaint said.
Gandhi called for a national-level inquiry into the case. He also sought creation of a National Faith Food Safety Framework, jointly overseen by the NHRC and the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), which would mandate periodic accredited testing, random audits, and quarterly public reporting from all large-scale religious and charitable food institutions. ghee adulteration fish oil lard complaint_filed alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India Tirupati ghee scandal prov:wasAssociatedWith Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) ghee scandal ghee fflo:hasAdulterant fish oil confirmed the presence of beef tallow, fish oil, and lard in the ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant lard confirmed the presence of beef tallow, fish oil, and lard in the ghee Tirupati ghee scandal prov:used ghee allegedly adulterated ghee was supplied adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams supplied to the temple ghee fflo:hasAdulterant beef tallow confirmed the presence of beef tallow Tirupati ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba Dairy Pvt Ltd Bhole Baba Dairy Pvt Ltd, had supplied nearly 68 lakh kilograms of spurious Tirupati ghee adulteration fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional This was not an act of negligence. It was a carefully engineered betrayalb5:T1549,Bengaluru police crackdown uncovers counterfeit ‘Nandini’ ghee racket: How the network operated hindustantimes.com Bengaluru police crackdown uncovers counterfeit ‘Nandini’ ghee racket: How the network operated
Authorities confiscated 8,136 liters of adulterated ghee, machinery, and cash, with a total value of ₹1.27 crore in a cross-state operation.
Bengaluru police on Saturday busted a large network involved in producing adulterated ghee and selling them in fake packets of Karnataka milk federations (KMF)'s ‘Nandhini’ following the arrest of four people.
Apart from the arrest, police seized around 8,136 litres of adulterated ghee, coconut and palm oil, ₹1.19 lakh in cash, four goods vehicles used for transportation, machinery used for manufacturing the adulterated ghee, and other related items, news agency PTI reported quoting Bengaluru police officials.
The network allegedly produced adulterated ghee in Tamil Nadu and filled it into fake Nandini brand sachets and plastic bottles, and sold them across Bengaluru.
According to a statement issued by the office of Bengaluru police commissioner Seemath Kumar Singh, the total value of the seized property is approximately ₹1.27 crore.
Behind the adulteration racket
Keeping an eye on the peaking demand of Nandini ghee in Karnataka, the members of the network had been preparing adulterated ghee in Tamil Nadu, and filling it into counterfeit Nandini sachets and plastic bottles.
The forged packets and bottles were then supplied to the Bengaluru-based accused, who held official KMF licenses and distributed the adulterated ghee to various wholesale and retail shops and Nandini parlours across the city, passing it off as original Nandini ghee at the actual market price.
“Based on intelligence gathered secretly by the central crime branch (CCB), special investigation squad and the KMF vigilance wing officers, the operation was tracked,” the statement stated.
Crackdown
On Friday, a joint team of the central crime branch (CCB), special investigation squad and the KMF vigilance wing conducted a raid on the godowns, shops, and goods vehicles belonging to Krishna Enterprises in Nanjamba Agrahara, Chamarajpet, all of which were owned by the main accused and their family members.
During the raids, a vehicle transporting adulterated ghee was seized and the driver was arrested.
A case has been registered at the CCB special investigation division, police said, adding that further investigation is underway.
(With PTI inputs)
- Follow the latest breaking news, major developments and agenda-setting stories from India and around the world with the newsdesk at Hindustan Times. Operating round the clock, the desk brings together experienced editors, reporters and correspondents to deliver fast, accurate and contextual reporting across subjects that influence public policy, governance, business, society and international affairs. The HT News Desk covers politics, elections, government policies, the economy, business and markets, science and technology, the environment, law and order, infrastructure, education, climate issues and geopolitics, while closely tracking developments across states, institutions and global capitals. The team also leads coverage of major breaking news events, policy announcements, court proceedings, natural disasters, public emergencies and significant international developments. Reports published by the newsdesk are based on information gathered from reporters on the ground, official statements, government agencies, court records, regulatory filings, recognised institutions and other authoritative sources. Stories undergo editorial scrutiny and verification processes to ensure accuracy, fairness and relevance, and are updated as events evolve and additional information becomes available. Whether covering a key political decision in New Delhi, an economic policy shift affecting millions, a landmark court ruling or a major global event, the HT News Desk aims to provide readers with reliable, fact-based journalism that delivers not only the latest developments but also the context and analysis needed to understand their wider implications.Read More ghee adulteration counterfeit coconut oil palm oil raid arrest seizure case registration alleged Bengaluru, Karnataka, India adulterated ghee fflo:hasAdulterant coconut oil seized around 8,136 litres of adulterated ghee, coconut and palm oil adulterated ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil seized around 8,136 litres of adulterated ghee, coconut and palm oil adulterated ghee fflo:commonIn Tamil Nadu produced adulterated ghee in Tamil Nadu adulterated ghee fflo:hasAdulterant coconut oil adulterated ghee, coconut and palm oil ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith ghee production network network involved in producing adulterated ghee ghee adulteration act prov:used ghee producing adulterated ghee ghee adulteration method fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional network involved in producing adulterated ghee Adulteration of ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith Krishna Enterprises godowns, shops, and goods vehicles belonging to Krishna Enterprises Adulteration of ghee prov:used ghee distributed the adulterated ghee Passing off adulterated ghee as original fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling passing it off as original Nandini ghee Case registration fflo:issuedBy CCB special investigation division A case has been registered at the CCB special investigation divisionb6:Taa5,CCB unearths interstate racket selling adulterated Nandini ghee; 8,136 litres seized thehindu.com The Central Crime Branch (CCB) has dismantled a large interstate network involved in producing adulterated ghee in Tamil Nadu, packing it in fake Nandini-branded sachets and bottles, and distributing it across Bengaluru.
Four accused have been arrested, and 8,136 litres of adulterated ghee worth ₹1.26 crore have been seized.
According to officials, the accused exploited the high demand for Nandini ghee in Karnataka by preparing spurious ghee using coconut and palm oil in Tamil Nadu and supplying it to their Bengaluru counterparts, who held official KMF licences.
These licence-holders allegedly distributed the counterfeit product to wholesale shops, retail outlets, and Nandini parlours across the city at full market price.
Acting on intelligence gathered by the CCB Special Investigation Squad and the KMF Vigilance Wing, a joint team conducted raids on Friday at the godowns, shops, and vehicles of Krishna Enterprises in Nanjamba Agrahara, Chamarajpet. A vehicle transporting adulterated ghee from Tamil Nadu, packed in fake Nandini sachets and bottles, was also intercepted, and its driver detained.
Police seized five mobile phones used in the crime, four goods vehicles, ₹1,19,640 in cash, machinery used to manufacture the fake ghee, and large quantities of coconut and palm oil. The total value of seized property is estimated at ₹1,26,95,200.
A case has been registered at the CCB Special Investigation Division. Further investigations are on.
Published - November 15, 2025 07:54 pm IST ghee adulteration counterfeit coconut oil palm oil raid seizure arrest alleged Bengaluru, Karnataka, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant coconut oil preparing spurious ghee using coconut and palm oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil preparing spurious ghee using coconut and palm oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod substitution with coconut and palm oil preparing spurious ghee using coconut and palm oil substitution with coconut and palm oil fflo:hasFraudType Substitution preparing spurious ghee using coconut and palm oil substitution with coconut and palm oil fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional dismantled a large interstate network involved in producing adulterated ghee production of adulterated ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith Krishna Enterprises raids on Friday at the godowns, shops, and vehicles of Krishna Enterprises adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt Production producing adulterated ghee in Tamil Nadu distribution of adulterated ghee fflo:occursAt Bengaluru distributing it across Bengaluru distribution of adulterated ghee fflo:occursAt Retail distributed the counterfeit product to wholesale shops, retail outletsb7:T97c,Tirumala ghee adulteration case: SIT grills Dharma Reddy for second day newindianexpress.com TIRUPATI: The SC-appointed Special Investigation Team (SIT), led by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), on Wednesday continued questioning former Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) Additional Executive Officer AV Dharma Reddy for the second consecutive day in the Tirumala laddu ghee adulteration case.
Dharma Reddy arrived at the SIT office near Alipiri around 8.30 am. Sources said SIT officials repeated several questions from Tuesday’s session as he had not provided clear answers earlier.
He was questioned in detail about alleged irregularities in the tender process for ghee procurement. Officials asked why certain tender conditions were altered, including the removal of the word ‘milk’ from the tender rules in February 2020 and its reintroduction in November 2023.
They also sought clarification on why the use of allegedly adulterated ghee tankers was permitted. Dharma is said to have denied any wrongdoing.
Meanwhile, directors of Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Milk Pvt. Ltd. — Pomil Jain (A3) and Vipin Jain (A4) — who are out on bail, appeared before the SIT for questioning.
Their presence at the SIT office at the same time as Dharma Reddy’s questioning drew attention. The lawyer of Bhole Baba Dairy directors said, “We have no connection with Dharma Reddy’s inquiry. We did not attend questioning alongside him,” distancing his clients from Dharma Reddy.
In another development, SIT teams have intensified their search for Karimulla, the manager of Bhole Baba Dairy and son-in-law of accused Apurva Chawda (A5). Two SIT teams reportedly went to Srikalahasti and Chennai to locate him.
Investigation indicate that ghee supplied from the banned Bhole Baba Dairy was transferred to Vaishnavi Dairy before being supplied to the TTD. ghee adulteration substitution unsafe_food questioning search alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India Bhole Baba Dairy fflo:propagatesTo Vaishnavi Dairy ghee supplied from the banned Bhole Baba Dairy was transferred to Vaishnavi Dairy Vaishnavi Dairy fflo:propagatesTo TTD transferred to Vaishnavi Dairy before being supplied to the TTD Karimulla prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba Dairy Karimulla, the manager of Bhole Baba Dairy Karimulla prov:wasAssociatedWith Apurva Chawda son-in-law of accused Apurva Chawda ghee fflo:foundAt TTD supplied to the TTDb8:Tc31,Singed by adulterated ghee controversy, Tirupati temple board now puts focus on quality of rice indianexpress.com Singed by adulterated ghee controversy, Tirupati temple board now puts focus on quality of rice
Sri Venkateswara temple at Tirumala in Andhra Pradesh’s Tirupati district uses tonnes of rice daily for its annaprasadam.
Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD), which manages the Lord Sri Venkateswara temple at Tirumala in Andhra Pradesh’s Tirupati district, has turned its attention to the quality of rice being supplied to the temple’s kitchens to make prasadam in the aftermath of a major controversy over the adulteration of ghee used to make the temple’s famous laddus.
On Thursday, the TTD issued an advisory to the Rice Millers Associations of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana regarding the quality of rice. The advisory said there would be a strict protocol to check the quality of rice, and that if samples did not pass the stringent tests, entire truckloads would be rejected.
This comes a week after a CBI team investigating the ghee adulteration filed a chargesheet. The chargesheet said that between 2019 and 2024, suppliers sold 60 lakh kg of adulterated ghee worth Rs 250.80 crore to the temple.
Appealing to rice millers who supply thousands of tonnes of rice to the temple, TTD Additional Executive Officer C Venkaiah Chowdary urged them to send only superior quality rice, which is used to make the “annaprasadam” that is served to devotees.
Chowdary held a meeting with the rice millers of both Andhra Pradesh and Telangana on Thursday at the conference hall of the Sri Padmavati Rest House in Tirumala.
He outlined steps to ensure that rice is supplied to TTD in accordance with the prescribed standards under the supervision of AP and Telangana Rice Millers Association. He said he gave instructions to the officials concerned to allow the rice served to devotees in annaprasadam only after it is thoroughly checked for quality and taste.
As per the new guidelines that the TTD issued to rice millers, the latter will submit a monthly schedule for rice supply and variety to TTD officials.
Nearly 20,000 kg of rice is used daily for making annaprasadam in Tirumala, Tiruchanoor and other local temples. About 60% of the rice millers supplying rice to TTD are from Andhra Pradesh, and 40% are from Telangana.
Chowdary directed rice procurement officials of the TTD to hold virtual meetings with rice millers every month to ensure that the quality of rice is maintained. TTD is now seeking monthly feedback on the quality of annaprasadam through Srivari Sevaks — volunteers who help devotees. ghee adulteration unknown chargesheet alleged Tirupati, Andhra Pradesh, India chargesheet fflo:issuedBy CBI team CBI team investigating the ghee adulteration filed a chargesheet TTD fflo:compliesWith prescribed standards ensure that rice is supplied to TTD in accordance with the prescribed standards Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams prov:used rice uses tonnes of rice daily for its annaprasadam ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith suppliers suppliers sold 60 lakh kg of adulterated gheeb9:Tead,Pawan Kalyan Sanatana Dharma Board Tirupati Laddu Ghee newkerala.com Andhra Dy CM Pawan Kalyan calls for 'Sanatana Dharma Parirakshana Board' amid Tirupati Laddu ghee row
Amaravati, November 12
Andhra Pradesh Deputy Chief Minister Pawan Kalyan called for the establishment of a 'Sanatana Dharma Parirakshana Board' to safeguard the Sanatan faith, amid controversy over alleged adulteration in the ghee used for Tirupati Laddus.
In a post shared on the social media platform X on Tuesday, Kalyan stated that the sentiments and practices of Sanatanis are being mocked and undermined, which erodes the trust of devotees.
The Deputy CM wrote, "For the global Hindu community, Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam is more than a pilgrimage centre; it is a sacred spiritual sojourn. The Tirupati Laddu is not just a sweet; it is a shared emotion - we distribute it among friends, family and strangers alike, for it embodies our collective belief and profound faith."
"On average, nearly 2.5 crore devotees visit Tirumala every year. And when the sentiments and practices of Sanatanis are mocked or undermined, it is not merely hurtful; it shatters the trust and devotion of millions around the world. Secularism must be a two-way street," he added.
Calling for a protection body for Sanatan Dharma, he stated that the board must be established with the consensus of all stakeholders.
"Protection and respect for our faith cannot be negotiable. Our Sanatana Dharma is one of the oldest and ever-evolving civilisations, and it is high time we establish the Sanatana Dharma Parirakshana Board with the consensus of all the stakeholders," the X post read.
In another X post, Kalyan cited a media report alleging Rs 250 crore worth of adulterated ghee was used in Tirupati Laddus between 2019 and 2024.
This comes after former Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) Executive Officer Dharma Reddy appeared before the SIT in connection with the adulterated ghee case. He was questioned regarding the procurement of adulterated ghee.
Meanwhile, the SIT has issued online notices to former TTD Chairman YV Subba Reddy, directing him to appear for questioning on November 13. It is learned that he has requested a week's time, stating that he will appear before the SIT after November 15.
Chief Minister Chandrababu Naidu-led TDP slammed the previous YSRCP regime for the alleged adulteration.
"To make ghee, milk is needed. Especially for the pure ghee used in Tirumala laddus, it is made from cow's milk. But during the YCP regime, the adulterated ghee used for laddus was reportedly made without using real milk, from chemicals and animal fat, with spurious types of oils," TDP wrote on X.
— ANI ghee Tirupati Laddu adulteration chemicals animal fat spurious types of oils investigation alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India Tirupati Laddu fkg:hasIngredient ghee ghee used for Tirupati Laddus Tirupati Laddu fflo:hasAdulterant adulterated ghee alleging Rs 250 crore worth of adulterated ghee was used in Tirupati Laddus ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod made from chemicals and animal fat adulterated ghee used for laddus was reportedly made without using real milk, from chemicals and animal fat ghee fflo:hasAdulterant chemicals adulterated ghee used for laddus was reportedly made without using real milk, from chemicals and animal fat ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat adulterated ghee used for laddus was reportedly made without using real milk, from chemicals and animal fat ghee fflo:hasAdulterant spurious types of oils adulterated ghee used for laddus was reportedly made without using real milk, from chemicals and animal fat, with spurious types of oils pure ghee fkg:hasIngredient cow's milk pure ghee used in Tirumala laddus, it is made from cow's milkba:Te5e,TTD Laddu Ghee Scam: Ex-EO AV Dharma Reddy Questioned For Second Day By CBI-Led SIT In Tirupati freepressjournal.in Tirupati: Former Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam (TTD) Executive Officer (EO) A. V. Dharma Reddy appeared before the Special Investigation Team (SIT) probing the TTD laddu ghee adulteration case for the second day on Wednesday.
The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI)-led SIT was questioning Dharma Reddy at its temporary office near Alipiri.
The SIT officials interrogated him for nearly nine hours on Tuesday.
Officials led by CBI DIG Murali Rambha reportedly questioned him on lapses during his tenure in the procurement of ghee, verification of suppliers, and quality control measures.
He was reportedly questioned on how Bhole Baba Dairy, blacklisted by TTD in 2022, allegedly continued supplying ghee through proxy firms.
The SIT recently arrested one Ajay Kumar Sugandh, who supplied various chemicals to Bhole Baba Dairy.
The investigation by SIT revealed that Bhole Baba Organic Dairy of Uttarakhand never procured a single drop of milk or butter from anywhere, yet managed to supply 68 lakh kgs of ghee to TTD between 2019 and 2024 through its proxies, including Nellore-based Vyshnavi Dairy, Maharashtra-based Mal Ganga Dairy and Tamil Nadu-based AR Dairy.
The promoters of Bhole Baba Dairy allegedly established a full-fledged fake desi ghee manufacturing unit and supplied 68 lakh kg spurious ghee, valued at Rs 250 crore, to TTD for use in preparing laddu prasadam.
The SIT last month arrested K Chinna Appanna, a close aide of YSR Congress party's Rajya Sabha member and former TTD chairman Y V Subba Reddy.
Appanna, who served as Subba Reddy's personal assistant from 2014 to 2024, allegedly played a key role in awarding contracts to ineligible dairies.
The SIT has also reportedly served notices to Subba Reddy to appear before it for questioning on November 13.
The alleged laddu scam came to light after the Telugu Desam Party-led coalition came to power in June 2024. In September 2025, the state government constituted an SIT headed by Inspector General Sarvashreshta Tripathi to probe into the case.
However, on the petitions challenging the constitution of the SIT by the state government, the High Court in October 2024 ordered the creation of a new, independent five-member SIT, replacing the state-appointed SIT.
The SC-appointed SIT consists of two CBI officers, two senior police officers from Andhra Pradesh, and one official from the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI).
(Except for the headline, this article has not been edited by FPJ's editorial team and auto-generated from an agency feed.) ghee adulteration substitution spurious ghee questioning arrest alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India TTD laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith A. V. Dharma Reddy Former Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam (TTD) Executive Officer (EO) A. V. Dharma Reddy appeared before the Special Investigation Team (SIT) probing the TTD laddu ghee adulteration case TTD laddu ghee adulteration case prov:used ghee TTD laddu ghee adulteration case spurious ghee fflo:isSubstituteFor desi ghee fake desi ghee manufacturing unit and supplied 68 lakh kg spurious ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant various chemicals supplied various chemicals to Bhole Baba Dairy ghee fflo:hasAdulterant chemicals supplied various chemicals to Bhole Baba Dairy Adulteration of desi ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba Dairy promoters of Bhole Baba Dairy allegedly established a full-fledged fake desi ghee manufacturing unit Adulteration of desi ghee prov:used desi ghee fake desi ghee manufacturing unit and supplied 68 lakh kg spurious gheebb:Te1a,SIT Grills Former TTD EO For 9 Hours In Adulterated Ghee Probe deccanchronicle.com The SIT has also issued notices to former TTD chairman and YSRC Rajya Sabha member Y. V. Subba Reddy to appear on November 13. He has sought a short extension citing parliamentary commitments.
Tirupati:The CBI-led Special Investigation Team (SIT) investigating the laddu ghee adulteration case questioned former Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) executive officer A. V. Dharma Reddy for nearly nine hours in Tirupati on Tuesday. He appeared at the SIT’s temporary office at the Bhoodevi Complex near Alipiri in the morning, and the questioning continued throughout the day under the supervision of CBI DIG Murali Rambha.
Sources said the SIT sought clarity on procurement protocols and quality checks followed during the period when synthetic ghee entered the supply chain. Investigators examined supplier selection, credential verification, documentation, and whether any internal red flags were raised or acted upon. They also reviewed the administrative process that allowed the supply chain to function.
A key focus was how Bhole Baba Organic Dairy, blacklisted in 2022, continued supplying ghee to TTD through proxy firms. Recent findings showed that Bhole Baba and associated entities — Vyshnavi Dairy, Mal Ganga Dairy and AR Dairy — supplied nearly 68 lakh kg of synthetic ghee, worth about `250 crore, between 2019 and 2024 despite not procuring milk or butter. The arrest of Delhi-based chemical supplier Ajay Kumar Sugandh, who supplied emulsifiers, beta carotene and artificial flavouring agents, exposed the scale of adulteration.
The SIT is probing possible internal facilitation that may have enabled the continuation of supplies even after blacklisting. While no serving or former official has been named as an accused, statements indicate that some officers may have aided the process through documentation or approvals. These details are being verified against records and digital data.
Bhole Baba Organic Dairy directors Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain, currently out on bail, were questioned separately in Tirupati on Tuesday, and parts of their statements were used for cross-verification during Dharma Reddy’s examination.
After the session, Dharma Reddy briefly approached the media but withdrew when Jana Sena Tirupati in-charge Kiran Rayal confronted him holding a laddu. Sources said further questioning may follow.
The SIT has also issued notices to former TTD chairman and YSRC Rajya Sabha member Y. V. Subba Reddy to appear on November 13. He has sought a short extension citing parliamentary commitments. ghee adulteration prohibited_additive synthetic ghee questioning investigation alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India synthetic ghee supply to TTD prov:wasAssociatedWith A. V. Dharma Reddy questioned former Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) executive officer A. V. Dharma Reddy for nearly nine hours in Tirupati on Tuesday. He appeared at the SIT’s temporary office at the Bhoodevi Complex near Alipiri in the morning, and the questioning continued throughout the day under the supervision of CBI DIG Murali Rambha. Sources said the SIT sought clarity on procurement protocols and quality checks followed during the period when synthetic ghee entered the supply chain. synthetic ghee fflo:foundAt supply chain synthetic ghee entered the supply chain synthetic ghee fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee supplied nearly 68 lakh kg of synthetic ghee synthetic ghee supply to TTD prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Bhole Baba Organic Dairy... continued supplying ghee to TTDbc:Tfe2,SIT grills ex-Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams Additional EO in ghee adulteration case newindianexpress.com TIRUPATI: The Supreme Court-appointed Special Investigation Team (SIT), led by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), has ramped up its probe into the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) ghee adulteration case, unravelling a deep-rooted conspiracy, involving multiple suppliers.
Following the arrest of Ajay Kumar Suganda (A16), a Delhi-based trader, SIT summoned former TTD Additional Executive Officer AV Dharma Reddy for questioning at its Alipiri office in Tirupati on Tuesday.
Dharma Reddy appeared before SIT, and was questioned for 11 hours in two spells (9 am to 2 pm and 3 to 9 pm) by CBI DIG Murali Rambha and his team. Presenting documentary evidence, the probe team reportedly questioned him extensively pertaining to the ghee procurement tender process. After questioning, Dharma Reddy left the SIT office without interacting with the media.
YV seeks time after SIT summons
SIT has also issued a notice to former TTD Chairman YV Subba Reddy, seeking his presence on November 13 for inquiry. However, the YSRCP Rajya Sabha member informed that he would be attending a Parliamentary Standing Committee meeting in Lucknow from November 13 to 15, and sought one-week extension, stating that he would be available at his residence in Hyderabad.
Meanwhile, the ACB court in Nellore heard arguments on the SIT petition seeking custody of K Chinna Appanna (A24), who is now in judicial remand. Assistant Public Prosecutor Jayashekar and the CBI counsel presented the merits of SIT’s custody request.
In a remand report submitted through East Police, SIT explained the role of Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain, Directors of Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Milk Pvt Ltd, who allegedly manufactured adulterated ghee at their Bhagwanpur plant near Roorkee, Uttarakhand.
Instead of using pure milk, the ghee was reportedly blended with palm oil, palm kernel oil, and palmolein sourced from Budge Budge Company, Kolkata, along with chemicals like beta-carotene, acetic acid ester, and artificial ghee flavour to pass lab tests and mimic authentic aroma.
The adulterated ghee was then supplied to the TTD through Bhole Baba and other firms, including Sri Vyshnavi Dairy Specialties Pvt Ltd, Malganga Milk & Agro Products Pvt Ltd (Pune), and AR Dairy Foods Pvt Ltd (Dindigul, Tamil Nadu). This ghee was used in preparing the sacred Laddu and other prasadams offered to Lord Venkateswara at Tirumala temple, causing widespread outrage, and deeply hurting the sentiments of millions of devotees. ghee adulteration manufacture of adulterated ghee by Bhole Baba ghee was reportedly blended with palm oil, palm kernel oil, and palmolein ghee was reportedly blended with chemicals like beta-carotene, acetic acid ester, and artificial ghee flavour alleged India, Tirumala temple, Tirupati manufacture of adulterated ghee by Bhole Baba prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Milk Pvt Ltd Directors of Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Milk Pvt Ltd, who allegedly manufactured adulterated ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil ghee was reportedly blended with palm oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm kernel oil ghee was reportedly blended with palm oil, palm kernel oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palmolein ghee was reportedly blended with palm oil, palm kernel oil, and palmolein ghee fflo:hasAdulterant beta-carotene chemicals like beta-carotene, acetic acid ester, and artificial ghee flavour ghee fflo:hasAdulterant acetic acid ester chemicals like beta-carotene, acetic acid ester, and artificial ghee flavour ghee fflo:hasAdulterant artificial ghee flavour chemicals like beta-carotene, acetic acid ester, and artificial ghee flavour ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Ajay Kumar Suganda arrest of Ajay Kumar Suganda (A16), a Delhi-based trader ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith YV Subba Reddy issued a notice to former TTD Chairman YV Subba Reddy TTD ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith K Chinna Appanna SIT petition seeking custody of K Chinna Appanna (A24)bd:Tbc3,Tirumala Laddu scam: 68 lakh kg of adulterated ghee supplied to TTD, says CBI thehindubusinessline.com A Special Investigation Team (SIT) of the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) has ‘found’ that 68 lakh tonnes of ghee, worth ₹251 crore, supplied to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) was adulterated for three years from 2022.
The SIT has been constituted in accordance with the orders of the Supreme Court, following an alleged use of adulterated ghee in the Laddu Prasadam of Tirumala, as reported by the TTD in September. The complaint was against the AR Dairy Food Private Ltd, Dindigul.
However, in the investigation and the FIR filed with the Supreme Court, the CBI named other companies and persons allegedly involved in the scam, and accused 17 persons, with AR Dairy being the first accused.
In its remand report filed in the district and sessions court of Nellore, after arresting Ajay Kumar Sugandh and accusing 16 including proprietor of Sugandh Oil & Chemicals, New Delhi, said that the arrested supplied monoglycerides and Acetic Acid Ester in the name of coconut oil, palm oil, and palm kernel oil from his firm.
These were used to prepare the adulterated ghee at Bhole Baba Organics Dairy Milk, Bhagwanpur, and the ghee was supplied to TTD by Bhole Baba through Sri Vyshnavi Dairy Specialities Pvt Ltd, Malganga Milk and Agro Products, and AR Dairy Food, according to the remand report.
Published on November 11, 2025 ghee adulteration investigation alleged New, Delhi, India, Tirumala, Bhagwanpur, Malganga, New Delhi ghee fflo:hasAdulterant monoglycerides supplied monoglycerides and Acetic Acid Ester in the name of coconut oil, palm oil, and palm kernel oil from his firm. These were used to prepare the adulterated ghee at Bhole Baba Organics Dairy Milk, Bhagwanpur, and the ghee was supplied to TTD by Bhole Baba through Sri Vyshnavi Dairy Specialities Pvt Ltd, Malganga Milk and Agro Products, and AR Dairy Food monoglycerides fflo:isSubstituteFor coconut oil supplied monoglycerides and Acetic Acid Ester in the name of coconut oil monoglycerides fflo:isSubstituteFor palm oil supplied monoglycerides and Acetic Acid Ester in the name of coconut oil, palm oil monoglycerides fflo:isSubstituteFor palm kernel oil supplied monoglycerides and Acetic Acid Ester in the name of coconut oil, palm oil, and palm kernel oil Acetic Acid Ester fflo:isSubstituteFor coconut oil supplied monoglycerides and Acetic Acid Ester in the name of coconut oil Acetic Acid Ester fflo:isSubstituteFor palm oil supplied monoglycerides and Acetic Acid Ester in the name of coconut oil, palm oil Acetic Acid Ester fflo:isSubstituteFor palm kernel oil supplied monoglycerides and Acetic Acid Ester in the name of coconut oil, palm oil, and palm kernel oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant Acetic Acid Ester supplied monoglycerides and Acetic Acid Ester in the name of coconut oil ghee adulteration at TTD prov:wasAssociatedWith AR Dairy Food Private Ltd complaint was against the AR Dairy Food Private Ltdbe:T1fff,NHRC Complaint Filed Over Tirupati Ghee Scandal: Activist Calls It 'National Betrayal Of Faith' freepressjournal.in A complaint has been filed before the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) over the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) ghee scandal, where nearly 68 lakh kilograms of synthetic fat was allegedly used in the temple’s sacred prasadam.
The complaint, filed by Hitendra Gandhi, termed the incident “a national betrayal of faith” and urged the NHRC to order a nationwide probe while establishing a Faith Food Safety Framework to safeguard the purity of offerings served in the name of God.
“If Tirupati’s holiness can be defiled, then no altar in India stands untouched,” said Gandhi.
Complaint Highlights Threat to Faith and Public Health
In his letter addressed to the NHRC Chairperson, Gandhi said incidents of unsafe food served at religious places reflect “a deeply unsettling reality” a pattern of deceit that endangers not only public health but the sanctity of worship itself.
He noted that India has over nine lakh registered temples, mosques, gurdwaras, churches, monasteries, and ashrams feeding millions daily through prasadam, langar, niyaz, bhog, and annadanam.
“These sacred kitchens are the heartbeat of our civilisation,” Gandhi wrote, “but for the corrupt, that sanctity is not just a crime; it is a betrayal of faith, humanity, and the conscience of the nation.”
Investigations Reveal Use of Industrial-Grade Ghee
Investigations into the Tirupati prasadam scam revealed that Bhole Baba Dairy Private Limited of Haridwar, Uttarakhand, supplied nearly 68 lakh kilograms of spurious, industrial-grade ghee to the TTD between 2019 and 2024.
The ghee used to prepare the laddu prasadam, offered to millions of devotees, reportedly contained hydrogenated oils, industrial fats, mono- and di-glycerides, and chemical esters designed to imitate pure cow ghee.
A Special Investigation Team (SIT), later joined by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), uncovered a web of forged FSSAI licences, tampered e-way bills, falsified invoices, and counterfeit packaging, exposing an organised supply-chain conspiracy that allegedly operated for years.
‘A Carefully Engineered Betrayal of Faith’
Gandhi said the Tirupati incident was not mere negligence but a deliberate betrayal against the faith of devotees.
“The belief that the offering is holy, sacred, divine — that is what makes India the capital of faith. To mix that offering with synthetic chemicals and industrial residue is to profane not only the temple but the very idea of devotion,” he stated.
Similar Incidents Reported Across India
The letter also cited several similar adulteration cases across the country.
In Gujarat (October 2023), officials seized 2,820 kg of fake Amul-labelled ghee used in mohanthal prasad at the Ambaji Temple.
In Odisha (October 2024), servitors of the Sri Baladevjew Temple, Kendrapara, raised concerns about foul-smelling ghee used for bhog.
In Amritsar, a factory manufacturing fake “desi ghee” by mixing vanaspati and refined oil was found supplying bulk quantities to local langar kitchens.
In Dhanbad (July 2025), enforcement officials seized 900 kilograms of adulterated dairy products bound for the Deoghar Mela.
Gandhi added that food poisoning incidents have also been reported from Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra, and Jammu & Kashmir, highlighting that the “poison of adulteration” has seeped into sacred spaces across religions.
Research Confirms Systemic Vulnerability
Quoting a National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) study, Gandhi noted that repeated foodborne illness outbreaks at mass religious gatherings underscore the systemic vulnerabilities of sacred kitchens across India.
Constitutional and Legal Violations Cited
Gandhi’s letter underscored that the right to safe food is a component of the right to life and dignity under Article 21 of the Constitution. The right to equality (Article 14) forbids selective indifference to food safety when consumed in faith, and the freedom of religion (Article 25) guarantees the right to worship “in purity, not deceit.”
“The systematic adulteration of sacred food violates all three,” Gandhi asserted.
He also cited international obligations, noting that both the World Health Organization (WHO) and the UN Codex Alimentarius Commission recognise safe food as part of the right to health.
Despite the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006, which prohibits the sale of unsafe or misbranded food and empowers the FSSAI to prosecute offenders, Gandhi said these safeguards failed repeatedly.
Call for NHRC Action and National Inquiry
Gandhi urged the NHRC to take suo motu cognisance of the issue as a matter of national human-rights concern, invoking its powers under Sections 12(a), 12(b), and 13(1)(a) of the Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993.
He prayed that the Commission institute a national-level inquiry into the adulteration of food used in religious and charitable offerings across India, taking the TTD case as the nucleus for a wider investigation.
The letter also requested the NHRC to seek status reports from the CBI, FSSAI, and state Food and Drug Administrations on ongoing and concluded adulteration cases linked to temples, mosques, gurdwaras, churches, monasteries, and charitable kitchens.
Call for Faith Food Safety Framework
Among his recommendations, Gandhi proposed:
Creation of a National Faith Food Safety Framework, jointly overseen by the NHRC and the FSSAI.
Mandatory accredited testing, random audits, and quarterly public reporting from all large-scale religious and charitable food institutions.
Health-protective measures and medical advisories for temple and kitchen workers.
Transparent procurement systems, including public access to supplier details, ingredient test reports, and certification records.
He concluded that only a “nationally coordinated faith food safety system” can restore trust, purity, and accountability in offerings served to millions in the name of God. ghee adulteration substitution fake ghee foul-smelling ghee seizure alleged Ambaji, Banaskantha, Gujarat, India Kendrapara, Odisha, India Amritsar, Punjab, India fake Amul-labelled ghee fflo:foundAt Ambaji Temple seized 2,820 kg of fake Amul-labelled ghee used in mohanthal prasad at the Ambaji Temple fake Amul-labelled ghee fflo:hasAdulterant fake Amul-labelled ghee fake Amul-labelled ghee used in mohanthal prasad foul-smelling ghee fflo:foundAt Sri Baladevjew Temple servitors of the Sri Baladevjew Temple, Kendrapara, raised concerns about foul-smelling ghee used for bhog fake desi ghee fflo:foundAt local langar kitchens a factory manufacturing fake “desi ghee” by mixing vanaspati and refined oil was found supplying bulk quantities to local langar kitchens adulterated dairy products fflo:foundAt Deoghar Mela seized 900 kilograms of adulterated dairy products bound for the Deoghar Mela food poisoning incidents fflo:inRegion Tamil Nadu food poisoning incidents have also been reported from Tamil Nadu Tirupati Ghee Scandal fflo:hasAdulterant synthetic fat nearly 68 lakh kilograms of synthetic fat was allegedly used Tirupati ghee adulteration prov:used ghee supplied nearly 68 lakh kilograms of spurious, industrial-grade ghee to the TTD ghee fflo:hasAdulterant hydrogenated oils ghee ... reportedly contained hydrogenated oils ghee fflo:hasAdulterant industrial fats ghee ... reportedly contained ... industrial fats ghee fflo:hasAdulterant mono- and di-glycerides ghee ... reportedly contained ... mono- and di-glycerides ghee fflo:hasAdulterant chemical esters ghee ... reportedly contained ... chemical esters Tirupati ghee adulteration method fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional not mere negligence but a deliberate betrayal Tirupati ghee adulteration fflo:hasFraudType Substitution designed to imitate pure cow ghee Bhole Baba Dairy Private Limited prov:wasAssociatedWith Tirupati ghee adulteration Bhole Baba Dairy Private Limited ... supplied nearly 68 lakh kilograms of spurious, industrial-grade ghee hydrogenated oils fflo:foundAt Distribution supplied nearly 68 lakh kilograms of spurious, industrial-grade gheebf:Teed,Laddu Ghee Adulteration: Ex-TTD Chief Called for Questioning by SIT deccanchronicle.com The SIT would examine his role as administrative head of the TTD during the period when adulterated ghee was supplied to the temple. Sources said the questioning of the former EO would focus on procurementprocedures, contract approvals and oversight mechanisms during his tenure.
Tirupati: Former TTD executive officer A.V. Dharma Reddy would appear before the CBI-led Special Investigation Team for questioning in the laddu ghee adulteration case.
According to police sources, the SIT issued notices to the former EO and he has agreed to attend questioning at 11 am in Tirupati on Tuesday.
The SIT would examine his role as administrative head of the TTD during the period when adulterated ghee was supplied to the temple. Sources said the questioning of the former EO would focus on procurement procedures, contract approvals and oversight mechanisms during his tenure.
Recent progress in the investigation, including the arrest of Appanna, former personal assistant to YSRC Rajya Sabha member and ex-TTD chairman Y.V. Subba Reddy, have shifted the focus towards possible insider involvement. The SIT has traced links between some accused suppliers and individuals within the institution, though investigators are yet to determine the extent of their role.
SIT is also looking into how Uttarakhand-based Bhole Baba Organic Dairy, which had been ineligible and blacklisted in 2022, continued to supply ghee to TTD by routing it through Vyshnavi Dairy, Mal Ganga Dairy and AR Dairy.
The investigation earlier revealed that the ghee supplied was not produced from milk or butter. Instead, palm oil and palm kernel oil were heated and thickened, after which beta carotene was added for colour and artificial essence for aroma. Emulsifiers such as mono and diglycerides, lactic acid ester and acetic acid ester were used to create consistency and raise the RM (Reichert–Miessl) value, allowing the product to pass routine purity tests.
The arrest of chemical supplier Ajay Kumar Sugandh had brought these details to light.
Records showed that synthetic ghee worth around Rs 250 crore, amounting to nearly 68 lakh kg, was supplied between 2019 and 2024. SITalso found that four tanker loads of rejected ghee supplied by AR Dairy in July 2024 were not returned. Instead, they were diverted to a location near Vyshnavi Dairy, relabelled and supplied again to TTD in August 2024. ghee adulteration investigation pending_test India, Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith A.V. Dharma Reddy Former TTD executive officer A.V. Dharma Reddy would appear before the CBI-led Special Investigation Team for questioning in the laddu ghee adulteration case. laddu ghee adulteration case prov:used ghee adulterated ghee was supplied to the temple ghee fflo:hasAdulterant unknown adulterant adulterated ghee was supplied to the temple ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Vyshnavi Dairy routing it through Vyshnavi Dairy ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Mal Ganga Dairy continued to supply ghee to TTD by routing it through Vyshnavi Dairy, Mal Ganga Dairy ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith AR Dairy rejected ghee supplied by AR Dairy ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil Instead, palm oil and palm kernel oil were heated and thickened ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm kernel oil Instead, palm oil and palm kernel oil were heated ghee fflo:hasAdulterant beta carotene beta carotene was added for colour ghee fflo:hasAdulterant artificial essence artificial essence for aroma ghee fflo:hasAdulterant mono and diglycerides Emulsifiers such as mono and diglycerides... were used to create consistency ghee fflo:hasAdulterant lactic acid ester lactic acid ester and acetic acid ester were used to create consistencyc0:Tf42,Uttarakhand dairy dupes TTD with 68 lakh kg of fake ghee, CBI probe finds siasat.com Hyderabad: A dairy in Uttarakhand has become a talking point as it duped the Tirumala Tirupathi Devasthanam with 68 lakh kg of fake ghee worth Rs 250 crore.
A probe by the CBI into the Tirupathi ghee adulteration revealed that the dairy supplied the fake ghee to the TTD, which runs the Tirupathi temple in Andhra Pradesh. According to reports, the CBI-led special investigation team had arrested Ajay Sugadh, who supplied chemicals like monodiglerides to the Bhole Baba Organic dairy.
The dairy was contracted by the TTD for supplying ghee, which was used for preparing the laddu prasadam at the Tirupati temple. The SIT revealed these details in it’s remand report submitted to the Nellore court.
The Bhole Baba Organic dairy is run by promoters Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain in Bhagwanpur, Uttarakhand. The report further reveals that the promoters set up fake manufacturing units and forged milk procurement records.
Diary blacklisted in 2022
The dairy was disqualified and black listed in 2022, yet it continued to supply adulterated ghee to the TTD by successfully bidding for contracts through other dairies including AP based Vyshnavi dairy, Tamil Nadu -based AR Dairy foods and Uttar Pradesh based Mal Ganga.
The CBI further stated that in July 2024, four containers of ghee adulterated with animal fat, which were rejected by the TTD, were supplied by AR Dairy foods were supplied back to the Tirupati trust by the Bhole Baba Organic Dairy through Vyshnavi Dairy.
As part of the investigation, when the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) and the SIT inspected the AR dairy plant in Tamil Nadu, it was found that four tankers used for transporting ghee never returned to the plant. They were diverted to the stone crushing unit near Vyshnavi dairy in AP.
In August 2024, the Vyshnavi dairy changed the labels of the tankers, improved the quality of the adulterated ghee and supplied the same to the Thirupati Trust. The same ghee was used to prepare laddus by the TTD. ghee adulteration animal fat probe alleged Uttarakhand, India Adulteration of ghee supplied to TTD prov:used ghee supplied the fake ghee to the TTD ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat ghee adulterated with animal fat Adulteration of ghee supplied to TTD prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba Organic dairy dairy in Uttarakhand has become a talking point as it duped the Tirumala Tirupathi Devasthanam with 68 lakh kg of fake ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant monodiglycerides supplied chemicals like monodiglerides to the Bhole Baba Organic dairy Adulteration of ghee supplied to TTD prov:wasAssociatedWith Ajay Sugadh arrested Ajay Sugadh, who supplied chemicals like monodiglerides to the Bhole Baba Organic dairy Bhole Baba Organic dairy prov:wasAssociatedWith Pomil Jain Bhole Baba Organic dairy is run by promoters Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain Bhole Baba Organic dairy prov:wasAssociatedWith Vipin Jain Bhole Baba Organic dairy is run by promoters Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain Bhole Baba Organic dairy fflo:foundAt Bhagwanpur, Uttarakhand run by promoters Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain in Bhagwanpur, Uttarakhand supply of adulterated ghee to TTD prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba Organic Dairy supplied back to the Tirupati trust by the Bhole Baba Organic Dairy supply of adulterated ghee to TTD prov:wasAssociatedWith Vyshnavi Dairy supplied back to the Tirupati trust by the Bhole Baba Organic Dairy through Vyshnavi Dairy supply of adulterated ghee to TTD prov:wasAssociatedWith AR Dairy foods supplied by AR Dairy foods were supplied back labeling fraud on ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith Vyshnavi Dairy Vyshnavi dairy changed the labels of the tankers changing labels fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling changed the labels of the tankers improving quality of adulterated ghee fflo:hasFraudType Masking improved the quality of the adulterated gheec1:Td03,Sajjala accuses Naidu of politicising Tirumala ghee row, seeks CBI probe thehindu.com The YSR Congress Party (YSRCP) State Coordinator, Sajjala Ramakrishna Reddy, on Tuesday accused Chief Minister N. Chandrababu Naidu of “hurting the sentiments of millions of Tirumala devotees” for political gain by spreading false propaganda about adulterated ghee used in the preparation of Tirupati laddus.
Addressing the media at the party office, Mr. Ramakrishna Reddy alleged that Mr. Naidu had launched a “manufactured conspiracy” to divert public attention from the YSRCP’s State-wide rallies against the privatisation of newly established government medical colleges. He claimed that the former Chief Minister had even “misled a few national media houses” with misinformation aimed at maligning the YSRCP and former TTD Chairman Y.V. Subba Reddy.
Clarifying the timeline of events, he said complaints regarding the ghee supplier, Bolebaba, were received during Mr. Subba Reddy’s tenure and that the firm was blacklisted after laboratory verification. “The questionable ghee tankers arrived only after Mr. Naidu took charge. How can the YSRCP be blamed?” he asked, citing the SIT remand report that noted how tanker samples were rejected by the NDDB in July 2024 but allegedly reused in August under the current administration.
Referring to an NDDB report dated March 27, 2025, Mr. Sajjala said it detected traces of palm oil and palm stearin in ghee samples—months after the TDP came to power. “This report clearly falls under Chandrababu’s rule,” he asserted.
Calling the allegations “absurd,” he questioned the claim that the laddus were made entirely with chemicals. “If no milk-based ghee was used, how could lakhs of devotees and thousands of TTD staff not notice? Such laddus wouldn’t even remain stable,” he remarked.
Mr. Sajjala further alleged that the controversy was “scripted inside TTD offices” and amplified through “celebrity social media handles.” He accused the government of double standards, saying it ignored serious tragedies such as the Kasiugga temple incident while “pretending to protect faith” now.
Taking a swipe at Deputy Chief Minister K. Pawan Kalyan, he said the latter “speaks only when instructed by Chandrababu” and “avoids tough questions.”
Challenging the government to prove its sincerity, Mr. Sajjala demanded a CBI probe into the matter. “If you are honest, why hide behind a State SIT? Why weaponise faith and hurt devotees?” he asked.
Published - November 11, 2025 08:55 pm IST ghee adulteration palm oil palm stearin blacklisting alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India Tirupati laddus fkg:hasIngredient ghee ghee used in the preparation of Tirupati laddus detection of palm oil and palm stearin in ghee fflo:supportedBy NDDB report dated March 27, 2025 Referring to an NDDB report dated March 27, 2025, Mr. Sajjala said it detected traces of palm oil and palm stearin in ghee samples finding of palm oil in ghee fflo:foundIn ghee detected traces of palm oil and palm stearin in ghee samples finding of palm oil in ghee fflo:identifies palm oil detected traces of palm oil and palm stearin in ghee samples finding of palm oil in ghee fflo:identifies palm stearin detected traces of palm oil and palm stearin in ghee samplesc2:T1d45,Delhi businessman's judicial custody sought for supplying 'chemicals' used to adulterate ghee for Tirupati laddus hindustantimes.com Delhi businessman's judicial custody sought for supplying 'chemicals' used to adulterate ghee for Tirupati laddus
Nellore , The SIT probing the Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration case has sought the judicial custody of businessman Ajay Kumar Sugandh, who allegedly supplied chemicals used to adulterate the ghee, to conduct a thorough probe into the matter.
Sugandh, accused number 16 in the case, was arrested on November 7 for his role in colluding with several other accused in the alleged ghee adulteration case.
“The investigation is in a crucial stage, and the accused may influence and threaten witnesses. Hence, this court may be pleased to remand Ajay Kumar Sugandh to judicial custody in the interest of justice,” the remand report filed before a local court said.
According to the SIT, Sugandh, who owns the New Delhi-based Sugandh Oil and Chemicals, conspired with the main accused – Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain – to supply chemicals allegedly used to adulterate ghee for Tirupati laddus.
The remand report said monoglycerides and acetic acid ester were supplied to Harsh Fresh Foodz Pvt Ltd, represented by its directors Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain, and Harsh Trading Company during the financial years 2022-23, 2023-24 and 2024-25.
They raised invoices under coconut oil, palm oil, and palm kernel oil for these chemicals to prepare the adulterated ghee at Bhole Baba Oroganic Dairy Milk Pvt Ltd in Bhagwanpur.
“The said adulterated ghee was supplied to TTD by Bhole Baba Oroganic Dairy Milk Pvt Ltd through Sri Vyshnavi Dairy Specialities Pvt Ltd, Malganga Milk and Agro Products Pvt Ltd, and AR Dairy Food Pvt Ltd,” the remand report said.
Later, the alleged adulterated ghee eventually found its way into the consecrated Tirupati laddus, as it was procured by the temple body.
As part of a criminal conspiracy with Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain, the SIT accused Sugandh of deliberately issuing false invoices with malicious intention to conceal the true nature of the chemical substances being supplied for adulteration.
Between FY23 and FY25, Sugandh was accused of selling chemicals worth up to ₹8 crore under the guise of edible oils to Harsh Fresh Foodz and Harsh Trading Co.
According to the SIT, Sugandh is neither cooperating nor disclosing the facts, and he also failed to produce his mobile phone to “cover up his misdeeds”.
The SIT also alleged that Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain were in the practice of preparing adulterated ghee through accused Hari Mohan, Sanjay Chouhan and Ashish Rohilla.
They prepared adulterated ghee by mixing adulterants such as palm oil, palm kernel oil and palmolein, which were procured via Harsh Fresh Foodz at Bhole Baba Oroganic Dairy Milk.
Along with minimal quality of ghee, chemicals such as beta carotene, acetic acid ester, ghee flavour and other adulterants were used to adjust lab test values and maintain aroma in the adulterated ghee, the report.
Without procuring milk or manufacturing ghee, the SIT alleged that records were fabricated to show fake production and purchase of ghee by Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain through Bhole Baba Oroganic Dairy Milk.
Diverting 57 lakh kg of refined palm oil, palm kernel oil and palmolein, they produced over 68 lakh kg of adulterated ghee worth ₹251.5 crore, out of which over 37 lakh kg of ghee worth ₹137 crore was fraudulently sold to Vyshnavi Dairy Specialities Pvt Ltd, which in turn supplied it to the TTD, the SIT said.
“The said adulterated ghee supplied by Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Milk to the TTD through Vyshnavi Dairy Specialities and AR Dairy Food was utilised for the preparation of sacred ‘prasadams’ of Lord Venkateswara Swamy,” the report said.
Moreover, four AR Dairy Food Pvt Ltd ghee tankers, which were rejected by the temple body, were resupplied through Vyshnavi Dairy Specialties Pvt Ltd, which the TTD accepted, the SIT alleged.
This article was generated from an automated news agency feed without modifications to text. ghee adulteration adulterate ghee for Tirupati laddus mixing adulterants such as palm oil, palm kernel oil and palmolein chemicals such as beta carotene, acetic acid ester, ghee flavour and other adulterants were used pending_test India, Tirupati Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration prov:used ghee adulterate ghee for Tirupati laddus ghee fflo:hasAdulterant chemicals chemicals to prepare the adulterated ghee preparation of adulterated ghee by Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain prov:wasAssociatedWith Pomil Jain Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain were in the practice of preparing adulterated ghee preparation of adulterated ghee by Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain prov:wasAssociatedWith Vipin Jain Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain were in the practice of preparing adulterated ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palmolein They prepared adulterated ghee by mixing adulterants such as palm oil, palm kernel oil and palmolein ghee fflo:hasAdulterant acetic acid ester chemicals such as beta carotene, acetic acid ester, ghee flavour and other adulterants were used ghee fflo:hasAdulterant ghee flavour chemicals such as beta carotene, acetic acid ester, ghee flavour and other adulterants were used Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Ajay Kumar Sugandh businessman Ajay Kumar Sugandh, who allegedly supplied chemicals used to adulterate the ghee Ajay Kumar Sugandh prov:wasAssociatedWith Sugandh Oil and Chemicals Sugandh, who owns the New Delhi-based Sugandh Oil and Chemicals Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Pomil Jain conspired with the main accused – Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain – to supply chemicals Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Vipin Jain conspired with the main accused – Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain – to supply chemicals Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Harsh Fresh Foodz Pvt Ltd supplied to Harsh Fresh Foodz Pvt Ltd, represented by its directors Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain ghee fflo:hasAdulterant monoglycerides monoglycerides and acetic acid ester were supplied to adulterate ghee ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Ajay Kumar Sugandh SIT accused Sugandh of deliberately issuing false invoices ghee adulteration act prov:used ghee prepare the adulterated ghee issuing false invoices fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling issuing false invoices with malicious intention to conceal the true nature ghee adulteration method fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional deliberately issuing false invoices with malicious intention Ajay Kumar Sugandh prov:wasAssociatedWith Pomil Jain criminal conspiracy with Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain Ajay Kumar Sugandh prov:wasAssociatedWith Vipin Jain criminal conspiracy with Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain preparation of adulterated ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith Hari Mohan preparing adulterated ghee through accused Hari Mohan ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil mixing adulterants such as palm oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm kernel oil mixing adulterants such as palm oil, palm kernel oil and palmolein mixing palm oil, palm kernel oil and palmolein fflo:hasFraudType Substitution prepared adulterated ghee by mixing adulterants such as palm oil mixing adulterants to adjust lab test values fflo:hasFraudType Masking used to adjust lab test values and maintain aroma resupply of rejected ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith Vyshnavi Dairy Specialties Pvt Ltd resupplied through Vyshnavi Dairy Specialties Pvt Ltdc3:T11be,Bhole Baba promoters supplied rejected ghee stocks of AR dairy back to TTD through Vyshnavi dairy | Vijayawada News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Tirupati: In a shocking exposure, the ongoing CBI-led SIT investigation, has revealed that the four containers of ghee stocks adulterated with animal fat allegedly supplied by Tamil Nadu-based AR dairy and subsequently rejected by the 
Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) in July last year, were supplied back to the Tirupati trust by Bhole Baba dairy promoters through Vyshnavi dairy.
During the course of the ongoing investigation, when FSSAI officials and the SIT team inspected the AR dairy plant at Dindigul and questioned about the four rejected ghee tankers, it emerged that the four ghee tankers never returned to the AR dairy plant.
When the SIT sleuths tried to trace out the four ghee tankers, which went missing inconspicuously, it emerged that the four ghee tankers, which were rejected and returned by the TTD on July 25, 2024 based on the NDDB reports confirming adulteration of ghee with animal fat, were diverted to a local stone crushing unit located close to Vyshnavi dairy plant.
And in August, Vyshnavi dairy, which was still a ghee supplier to the TTD within the Andhra Pradesh circle category, changed the labels on the trucks, improved upon the quality and consistency of the synthetic ghee, and supplied back the same rejected ghee which was allegedly adulterated with animal fat to the Tirupati trust in August, 2024. And the same ghee was subsequently used in the preparation of the sacred Tirupati Laddu prasadams.
Further investigation by the SIT also exposed a "fake trial" of documentation prepared by the promoters of Bhole Baba dairy Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain in connivance with others to not only cover-up and re-supply the same rejected ghee stocks back to the TTD but to also establish a fake narrative that the returned ghee stocks of AR dairy were sold to Sun oil industries (Kolkata) and Maheswari chemicals.
Investigation by the SIT also revealed that like Bhole Baba dairy, Vyshnavi dairy also never procured a single litre of milk or butter but managed to supply synthetic ghee undetected for many years. All that the Vyshnavi dairy did was to procure spurious ghee from Bhole Baba dairy, re-label it and sell the same to the Tirupati trust under the within the state category, it was alleged.
To get to successfully bid for the TTD's ghee supply contracts and for certification purposes, Vyshnavi dairy also allegedly resorted to dubious acts of procuring original ghee samples from reputed dairies.
On the other hand, the SIT investigation has also exposed serious gaps in the mechanisms in place at the TTD to prevent rejected ghee stocks from being re-routed to them through other dairies. ghee adulteration recalled recall_triggered India, Tirupati ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat ghee stocks adulterated with animal fat adulteration of ghee with animal fat fflo:supportedBy NDDB reports NDDB reports confirming adulteration of ghee with animal fat animal fat fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee adulteration of ghee with animal fat SIT investigation fflo:targets ghee CBI-led SIT investigation, has revealed that the four containers of ghee stocks ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat ghee which was allegedly adulterated with animal fat synthetic ghee supply act prov:wasAssociatedWith Vyshnavi dairy Vyshnavi dairy also never procured a single litre of milk or butter but managed to supply synthetic ghee synthetic ghee supply act prov:used synthetic ghee managed to supply synthetic ghee undetected supply of rejected ghee to TTD prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba dairy promoters supplied back to the Tirupati trust by Bhole Baba dairy promoters supply of rejected ghee to TTD prov:wasAssociatedWith Vyshnavi dairy supplied back to the Tirupati trust by Bhole Baba dairy promoters through Vyshnavi dairy supply of adulterated ghee by AR dairy prov:wasAssociatedWith AR dairy allegedly supplied by Tamil Nadu-based AR dairy ghee adulteration act August 2024 prov:used ghee supplied back the same rejected ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod re-labeling and quality improvement changed the labels on the trucks, improved upon the quality and consistency re-labeling and quality improvement fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling changed the labels on the trucks TTD SCHEMA_MISMATCH gaps in mechanisms to prevent rejected ghee stocks from being re-routed serious gaps in the mechanisms in place at the TTD to prevent rejected ghee stocks from being re-routedc4:T12d3,Tirupati Laddu Scam: 'Never procured a drop of milk' How Uttarakhand dairy duped Tirupati trust for 5 years with 68 lakh kg fake ghee | Hyderabad News - The Times of India indiatimes.com TIRUPATI: The CBI-led special investigation team probing the Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration case has stumbled upon some shocking details following the arrest of A-16, Ajay Kumar Sugandh, who supplied various chemicals including monodiglycerides and acetic acid ester to Bhole Baba Organic Dairy, contracted by the TTD to supply ghee to be used in the preparation of laddu prasadam.
The SIT had made several startling revelations in the remand report submitted to the Nellore ACB court. The SIT investigation revealed that Bhole Baba Organic Dairy established by its promoters Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain at Bhagawanpur in Uttarakhand never procured a single drop of milk or butter from anywhere but yet managed to supply 68 lakh kg of ghee to the 
Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams between 2019 and 2024.
During the course of the investigation, the SIT unravelled the end to end modus operandi of Bhole Baba dairy promoters, who managed to successfully con the richest Hindu temple trust for five long years.
In the garb of a dairy unit, Bhole Baba promoters established a full fledged fake desi ghee manufacturing unit and managed to supply 68 lakh kg of spurious ghee worth Rs250 cr to the Tirupati trust. Investigation revealed that Bhole Baba dairy promoters created fake milk procurement and payment records but enquiries with the local milk farmers clearly established the fact that milk procurement was never done.
Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain purchased a nearby dairy sick unit and established Harsh fresh dairy at this sick unit, which is located about two km away from Bhole Baba dairy plant. 
Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain procured large quantities of palm oil and palm kernel oil in the name of Harsh fresh dairy from Delhi based Budges and Budges company, a large importer of palm oil from Malaysia.
They also sourced various other chemicals such as mono glycerides, acetic acid ester, lactic acid, beta carotene, artificial ghee essence etc. from suppliers like Ajay Kumar Sugandh and Delhi based Aristo chemicals.
The palm oil and palm kernel oil and other chemicals were shifted in batches from Harsh fresh dairy to Bhole Baba main plant, where the Bhole Baba dairy promoters got down to the business of manufacturing spurious ghee on a commercial scale. ghee adulteration mono glycerides arrest alleged Bhagawanpur, Uttarakhand, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant mono glycerides sourced various other chemicals such as mono glycerides, acetic acid ester, lactic acid, beta carotene, artificial ghee essence etc. from suppliers like Ajay Kumar Sugandh and Delhi based Aristo chemicals. The palm oil and palm kernel oil and other chemicals were shifted in batches from Harsh fresh dairy to Bhole Baba main plant, where the Bhole Baba dairy promoters got down to the business of manufacturing spurious ghee on a commercial scale. Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Pomil Jain Bhole Baba Organic Dairy established by its promoters Pomil Jain Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Vipin Jain Bhole Baba Organic Dairy established by its promoters Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Ajay Kumar Sugandh arrest of A-16, Ajay Kumar Sugandh, who supplied various chemicals ghee fflo:hasAdulterant monodiglycerides supplied various chemicals including monodiglycerides ghee fflo:hasAdulterant acetic acid ester supplied various chemicals including monodiglycerides and acetic acid ester to Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Bhole Baba Organic Dairy fflo:foundAt Bhagawanpur Bhole Baba Organic Dairy ... at Bhagawanpur in Uttarakhand Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration prov:used ghee supply ghee to be used in the preparation of laddu prasadam Bhole Baba Organic Dairy ghee supply modus operandi fflo:hasFraudType Substitution never procured a single drop of milk or butter from anywhere but yet managed to supply 68 lakh kg of ghee manufacturing spurious ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith Pomil Jain Bhole Baba dairy promoters got down to the business of manufacturing spurious ghee manufacturing spurious ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith Vipin Jain Bhole Baba dairy promoters got down to the business of manufacturing spurious ghee desi ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil manufacturing spurious ghee on a commercial scale desi ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm kernel oil palm oil and palm kernel oil ... manufacturing spurious ghee desi ghee fflo:hasAdulterant acetic acid ester sourced various other chemicals such as mono glycerides, acetic acid ester desi ghee fflo:hasAdulterant lactic acid sourced various other chemicals such as mono glycerides, acetic acid ester, lactic acidc5:T174e,Tirupati laddu row: How dairy supplied fake ghee worth  ₹250 crore to temple trust hindustantimes.com Tirupati laddu row: How dairy supplied fake ghee worth ₹250 crore to temple trust
The special investigation team (SIT) led by the CBI gathered these details after the arrest of one of the accused, Ajay Kumar Sugandh.
A dairy firm based in Uttarakhand managed to supply 68 lakh kg of fake ghee worth ₹250 crore to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) between 2019 and 2024, the CBI probe into the laddu ghee adulteration has revealed. The TTD runs the Tirupati Temple in Andhra Pradesh.
The special investigation team (SIT) led by the CBI gathered these details after the arrest of one of the accused, Ajay Kumar Sugandh, Times of India reported. The SIT stated these findings in a remand report submitted before the Nellore court.
Sugandh had supplied chemicals including monodiglycerides and acetic acid ester to the Bhole Baba Organic dairy, which supplied ghee used in preparation of laddu prasadam to the TTD.
How did the dairy firm supply fake ghee to TTD?
The CBI has said that the promoters of the dairy, Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain, had set up a fake desi ghee manufacturing unit. Both further forged milk procurement and payment records to fake their credibility, according to TOI.
The Bhole Baba Organic dairy was disqualified and blacklisted from supplying ghee in 2022. However, the dairy kept supplying adulterated ghee to the Tirupati temple trust by bidding for contracts through other dairies. These included the Vyshnavi dairy in Tirupati, UP-based Mal Ganga and Tamil Nadu-based AR Dairy Foods, TOI reported.
During this time, four containers of ghee stocks adulterated with animal fat were allegedly supplied through the AR Dairy to the TTD and eventually rejected by the trust. However, these came back to the TTD by Bhole Baba Dairy promoters through Vyshnavi dairy, the CBI probe revealed.
Officials from the FSSAI and SIT team inspected the AR Dairy plant based in Dindigul during the investigation. This led to the revelation that the four adulterated ghee tankers had never returned to the AR Dairy but were diverted to a local stone crushing unit near the Vyshnavi dairy plant, according to the TOI report.
Following this, the Vyshnavi dairy in August 2024 changed the labels on these trucks, improved the quality and consistence of the adulterated ghee, and supplied the same ghee back to the TTD.
- Follow the latest breaking news, major developments and agenda-setting stories from India and around the world with the newsdesk at Hindustan Times. Operating round the clock, the desk brings together experienced editors, reporters and correspondents to deliver fast, accurate and contextual reporting across subjects that influence public policy, governance, business, society and international affairs. The HT News Desk covers politics, elections, government policies, the economy, business and markets, science and technology, the environment, law and order, infrastructure, education, climate issues and geopolitics, while closely tracking developments across states, institutions and global capitals. The team also leads coverage of major breaking news events, policy announcements, court proceedings, natural disasters, public emergencies and significant international developments. Reports published by the newsdesk are based on information gathered from reporters on the ground, official statements, government agencies, court records, regulatory filings, recognised institutions and other authoritative sources. Stories undergo editorial scrutiny and verification processes to ensure accuracy, fairness and relevance, and are updated as events evolve and additional information becomes available. Whether covering a key political decision in New Delhi, an economic policy shift affecting millions, a landmark court ruling or a major global event, the HT News Desk aims to provide readers with reliable, fact-based journalism that delivers not only the latest developments but also the context and analysis needed to understand their wider implications.Read More ghee adulteration substitution animal fat arrest blacklist alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India fake ghee supply to TTD prov:used ghee supply 68 lakh kg of fake ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat ghee stocks adulterated with animal fat animal fat fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee ghee stocks adulterated with animal fat fake ghee supply to TTD prov:wasAssociatedWith Ajay Kumar Sugandh arrest of one of the accused, Ajay Kumar Sugandh fake ghee supply to TTD prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba Organic dairy dairy firm based in Uttarakhand managed to supply 68 lakh kg of fake ghee fake ghee supply to TTD prov:wasAssociatedWith Pomil Jain promoters of the dairy, Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain fake ghee supply to TTD prov:wasAssociatedWith Vipin Jain promoters of the dairy, Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain ghee fflo:hasAdulterant monodiglycerides supplied chemicals including monodiglycerides ghee fflo:hasAdulterant acetic acid ester supplied chemicals including monodiglycerides and acetic acid ester fake desi ghee manufacturing fflo:hasFraudType Substitution set up a fake desi ghee manufacturing unit fake desi ghee manufacturing fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional promoters of the dairy... had set up a fake desi ghee manufacturing unit ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba Organic dairy dairy kept supplying adulterated ghee ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Vyshnavi dairy Vyshnavi dairy in August 2024 changed the labels on these trucks ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith AR Dairy Foods supplied through the AR Dairy to the TTD animal fat fflo:foundAt Distribution supplied the same ghee back to the TTD ghee label changing method fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling changed the labels on these trucks ghee adulteration method fflo:hasFraudType Masking improved the quality and consistence of the adulterated gheec6:T911,Fake ghee worth ₹250 cr used in Tirupati laddus for 5 yrs: SIT indiatimes.com A year after the SC appointed a CBI-led SIT to investigate whether adulterated ghee had been used to prepare Tirupati laddus, the investigation has revealed that between 2019 and 2024, an Uttarakhand-based dairy prepared the ghee without procuring any milk or butter. SIT gathered these details following the arrest of accused Ajay Kumar Sugandh, who supplied various chemicals to this dairy, which was contracted by TTD to supply ghee for the laddu prasad. Details of investigation are part of a remand report filed by SIT in a Nellore court.
According to CBI, Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain, directors of M/s Bhole Baba Organic Dairy, set up a fake ghee manufacturing unit and forged milk procurement data. The dairy instead used chemicals like beta-carotene, acetic acid ester and ghee flavour to adjust lab test values and maintain ghee aroma. Bhole Baba dairy got blacklisted in 2022 but they continued to supply adulterated ghee through other dairies like Tirupati-based Vyshnavi dairy UP-based Mal Ganga and Tamil Nadu-based AR Dairy. CBI has alleged that TTD chairman YV Subba Reddy and other officials were aware of the adulterated ghee being supplied but were allegedly bribed into silence. The investigations have traced the money trail to Reddy's personal assistant Kaduru Chinnappanna. It has said in the report that a supplier of ghee gave ₹20 lakh cash to Chinnappanna through a hawala agent in Delhi. On other occasions, the TTD chairman's personal assistant received ₹30 lakh from an employee of the ghee supplier. ghee adulteration acetic acid ester ghee flavour investigation arrest blacklisting alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India Fake ghee manufacturing by Bhole Baba Organic Dairy prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba Organic Dairy directors of M/s Bhole Baba Organic Dairy, set up a fake ghee manufacturing unit ghee fflo:hasAdulterant acetic acid ester used chemicals like beta-carotene, acetic acid ester and ghee flavour ghee fflo:hasAdulterant ghee flavour used chemicals like beta-carotene, acetic acid ester and ghee flavour Adulteration of ghee with chemicals prov:used ghee prepared the ghee without procuring any milk or butter ghee fflo:hasAdulterant beta-carotene used chemicals like beta-carotenec7:Tf59,How dairy duped Tirupati trust for 5 years with 68 lakh kg fake ghee | India News - The Times of India indiatimes.com TIRUPATI: The dairy in Uttarakhand never procured a drop of milk or butter from anywhere, yet managed to supply 68 lakh kg of ghee worth Rs 250 crore to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD), which runs the famous Tirupati temple in Andhra Pradesh, between 2019 and 2024, the CBI probe into the laddu ghee adulteration has revealed.
 The CBI-led special investigation team (SIT) gathered these shocking details following the arrest of accused Ajay Kumar Sugandh, who supplied various chemicals like monodiglycerides and acetic acid ester to Bhole Baba Organic dairy, contracted by the TTD to supply ghee to be used in the preparation of laddu prasadam.
 The SIT made these revelations in its remand report submitted to a Nellore court.
 The dairy is run by its promoters Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain at Bhagawanpur in Uttarakhand.
 According to CBI, the promoters set up a fake desi ghee manufacturing unit and forged milk procurement and payment records.
 While Bhole Baba dairy got disqualified and blacklisted in 2022, they continued to supply spurious ghee to the TTD by successfully bidding for contracts through other dairies, including Tirupati-based Vyshnavi dairy, UP-based Mal Ganga and Tamil Nadu-based AR Dairy Foods.
 The CBI probe has also revealed that four containers of ghee stocks adulterated with animal fat allegedly supplied by AR dairy and subsequently rejected by the TTD in July last year were supplied back to the Tirupati trust by Bhole Baba dairy promoters through Vyshnavi dairy.
 During the investigation, when FSSAI officials and the SIT team inspected the AR dairy plant at Dindigul, it emerged that the four ghee tankers never returned to the AR dairy plant but were diverted to a local stone crushing unit located close to Vyshnavi dairy plant.
 And in Aug, Vyshnavi dairy, which was still a ghee supplier to the TTD within the Andhra Pradesh circle category, changed the labels on the trucks, improved upon the quality and consistency of the synthetic ghee, and supplied back the same rejected ghee to the Tirupati trust in August 2024, according to CBI. And the same ghee was subsequently used in the preparation of the sacred Tirupati Laddu prasadams. ghee adulteration animal fat CBI probe alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat ghee stocks adulterated with animal fat adulteration of ghee with animal fat prov:wasAssociatedWith AR dairy ghee stocks adulterated with animal fat allegedly supplied by AR dairy Bhole Baba Organic dairy fflo:hasAdulterant monodiglycerides supplied various chemicals like monodiglycerides and acetic acid ester to Bhole Baba Organic dairy Bhole Baba Organic dairy prov:wasAssociatedWith Pomil Jain The dairy is run by its promoters Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain Bhole Baba Organic dairy fake ghee manufacturing prov:wasAssociatedWith Vipin Jain promoters set up a fake desi ghee manufacturing unit ghee fflo:hasAdulterant monodiglycerides supplied various chemicals like monodiglycerides and acetic acid ester ghee fflo:hasAdulterant acetic acid ester supplied various chemicals like monodiglycerides and acetic acid ester resupply of rejected ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba dairy promoters supplied back to the Tirupati trust by Bhole Baba dairy promoters resupply of rejected ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith Vyshnavi dairy supplied back to the Tirupati trust by Bhole Baba dairy promoters through Vyshnavi dairy ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod label changing and quality improvement changed the labels on the trucks, improved upon the quality and consistency label changing and quality improvement fflo:hasFraudType Masking changed the labels on the trucks, improved upon the quality and consistency of the synthetic ghee animal fat fflo:foundAt Processing ghee stocks adulterated with animal fatc8:Tcba,SIT Reveals Widespread Ghee Adulteration At Tirumala Temple With Fake Supplies Worth Rs 250 Crore From Bhole Baba Dairy swarajyamag.com The Special Investigation Team (SIT) investigating the large-scale ghee adulteration scandal at the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) has discovered that the temple trust received adulterated ghee supplies for more than five years.
The probe, conducted under the supervision of the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), has exposed a complex web of fraud involving shell companies and chemical manipulation.
The recent arrest of Ajay Kumar Sugandh, identified as A-16 in the case, has provided critical insights into the operations of Bhole Baba Dairy, a company contracted to supply ghee to the TTD.
According to the SIT’s remand report submitted to the ACB Court in Nellore, the dairy based in Bhagawanpur, Uttarakhand supplied an estimated 68 lakh kg of ghee between 2019 and 2024, despite not sourcing any milk or butter from legitimate suppliers.
Investigators revealed that Bhole Baba Dairy was merely a front set up to produce and sell spurious ghee valued at around Rs 250 crore.
Its promoters allegedly forged milk procurement and payment records, which local cattle rearers later denied.
The SIT found that the company instead used palm oil and kernel oil, procured under the name Harsh Fresh Dairy from a Delhi-based importer of Malaysian palm oil.
To evade detection, the producers allegedly used acetic acid esters to manipulate the Reichert-Meissl (RM) value, a key quality control parameter.
Between 2022 and 2024, Bhole Baba Dairy reportedly purchased acetic acid ester worth Rs 7 crore from Sugandh.
Despite being blacklisted by the TTD in 2022, the company allegedly continued its fraudulent operations by routing supplies through other dairies, including Vyshnavi Dairy (Tirupati), Mal Ganga Dairy (Uttar Pradesh), and AR Dairy Foods (Tamil Nadu).
Please click here to add Swarajya as your preferred and trusted news source on Google
Arjun Brij is a Newsroom Associate at Swarajya. He tracks infrastructure and trade developments and posts on X at @arjun_brij. ghee adulteration spurious ghee arrest blacklisting alleged Tirumala, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee adulteration at Tirumala Temple prov:used ghee ghee adulteration scandal at the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams spurious ghee fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee produce and sell spurious ghee Bhole Baba Dairy fflo:foundAt Bhagawanpur, Uttarakhand dairy based in Bhagawanpur, Uttarakhand ghee fflo:hasAdulterant spurious ghee supplied an estimated 68 lakh kg of ghee... spurious ghee ghee adulteration at Tirumala Temple fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional complex web of fraud involving shell companies ghee adulteration at Tirumala Temple fflo:hasFraudType Substitution despite not sourcing any milk or butter from legitimate suppliers ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil company instead used palm oil and kernel oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant kernel oil company instead used palm oil and kernel oil manipulation of Reichert-Meissl value fflo:hasFraudType Masking To evade detection, the producers allegedly used acetic acid esters ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba Dairy Bhole Baba Dairy reportedly purchased acetic acid esterc9:Tdba,Tirupati Laddus scam: How a ‘milkless dairy’ supplied ₹250-cr fake ghee for sacred prasadam indiatimes.com The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) has revealed startling details in its probe into the 
Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) laddu ghee adulteration case, uncovering that an Uttarakhand-based dairy, which never procured a single drop of milk or butter, managed to supply 68 lakh kg of ghee worth ₹250 crore to the temple trust between 2019 and 2024, according to a report by The Times of India (TOI).
Citing the CBI-led Special Investigation Team’s (SIT) findings, TOI reported that 
Bhole Baba Organic Dairy, operated by promoters Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain in Bhagawanpur, Uttarakhand, had been contracted by TTD to supply ghee used in the making of the 
sacred laddu prasadam. 
However, investigators found that the unit was a fake desi ghee manufacturing setup, with forged records of milk procurement and payments.
The CBI SIT, which made these revelations in its remand report submitted to a Nellore court, said the investigation intensified following the arrest of Ajay Kumar Sugandh, who allegedly supplied industrial chemicals, including monodiglycerides and acetic acid ester, to Bhole Baba Organic Dairy.
Despite being disqualified and blacklisted by TTD in 2022, Bhole Baba’s promoters allegedly continued to supply 
adulterated ghee by bidding through other dairies, including Tirupati-based 
Vyshnavi Dairy, Uttar Pradesh-based Mal Ganga Dairy, and Tamil Nadu-based AR Dairy Foods, the SIT report noted, as cited by TOI.
The investigation also found that four containers of ghee stocks adulterated with animal fat, which had been rejected by TTD in July 2024, were resupplied to the temple trust by the same promoters through Vyshnavi Dairy. 
During a joint inspection by the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) officials and the SIT at the AR Dairy plant in Dindigul, it was discovered that the four ghee tankers never returned to the AR plant. Instead, they were diverted to a local stone-crushing unit near Vyshnavi Dairy, the report stated.
According to TOI, the SIT further revealed that in August 2024, Vyshnavi Dairy, still empanelled with TTD under the Andhra Pradesh circle, rebranded and relabeled the same tankers, refined the texture and consistency of the synthetic ghee, and supplied it back to the temple trust.
The TOI report added that this same batch of ghee was subsequently used in the preparation of the Tirupati Laddu prasadams, which are distributed to lakhs of devotees at the world-famous temple. ghee adulteration animal fat investigation blacklisting alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat ghee stocks adulterated with animal fat animal fat fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee ghee stocks adulterated with animal fat Bhole Baba Organic Dairy prov:wasAssociatedWith Pomil Jain Bhole Baba Organic Dairy, operated by promoters Pomil Jain Tirupati Laddu ghee adulteration prov:used ghee supply 68 lakh kg of ghee worth ₹250 crore Adulteration of ghee with animal fat prov:used ghee supply adulterated ghee Resupply of rejected ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith Vyshnavi Dairy resupplied to the temple trust by the same promoters through Vyshnavi Dairy Diversion of ghee tankers to stone-crushing unit prov:wasAssociatedWith AR Dairy Foods four ghee tankers never returned to the AR plant Rebranding and relabeling of synthetic ghee fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling rebranded and relabeled the same tankersca:T11d5,How Rs 250 crore fake ghee ended up in Tirupati Temple’s sacred laddus: Explained opindia.com In a scandal that has stunned devotees, investigators have found that fake ghee worth Rs 250 crore was allegedly supplied to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD), the trust managing the revered Tirupati temple, between 2019 and 2024.
A CBI-led Special Investigation Team (SIT) uncovered that Bhole Baba Organic Dairy, a company based in Uttarakhand, had never procured any milk or butter, yet somehow managed to supply a staggering 6.8 million kilograms of ghee to the temple.
The adulteration of ghee
According to officials, Bhole Baba Organic Dairy, run by Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain, operated what appeared to be a legitimate dairy unit but was in reality a front for manufacturing synthetic ghee. The company allegedly faked purchase invoices and payment records to make it seem as though it was producing pure desi ghee.
Shockingly, even after being blacklisted in 2022, the firm continued to funnel counterfeit ghee to the temple by using the names of other dairies, including Vyshnavi Dairy (Tirupati), Mal Ganga (Uttar Pradesh), and AR Dairy Foods (Tamil Nadu).
Animal fat and chemical additives
The SIT found that some of the ghee supplied was adulterated with animal fat. In July 2024, four tankers from AR Dairy were rejected by TTD after lab tests revealed contamination. But rather than being destroyed or returned, the rejected stock was allegedly diverted to Vyshnavi Dairy, where labels were replaced and the contents reprocessed to look fresh.
Investigators later discovered that these same tankers were resold to TTD in August 2024 as “new stock” and were subsequently used to prepare the sacred Tirupati laddus, offered daily to millions of devotees.
Traces of foreign fats spark outrage
The scandal burst into the open in September 2024, when Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N. Chandrababu Naiduclaimed that adulterated ingredients had been used in the temple’s revered laddus under the previous administration. Media reports quoted Naidu as saying the ghee could have contained beef tallow, fish oil, or pig lard, sparking public outrage.
Tests by the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) later confirmed the presence of foreign fats in some samples. Officials maintained that the adulterated batches had been withdrawn before being used, but the controversy severely shook public faith in the quality control system of one of India’s holiest shrines.
Arrests and continuing probe
The scandal began to unravel with the arrest of Ajay Kumar Sugandh, who supplied chemicals such as monodiglycerides and acetic acid esters, key ingredients for producing synthetic ghee, to Bhole Baba Organic Dairy.
The CBI’s probe now aims to uncover how the fake ghee managed to pass multiple layers of temple procurement checks, and whether officials within TTD or state dairy boards were complicit in the racket.
What began as a fraud for profit has now turned into a crisis of faith, raising uncomfortable questions about oversight, corruption, and the sanctity of offerings made at one of Hinduism’s most sacred temples. ghee adulteration substitution animal fat beef tallow foreign fats arrest investigation alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat ghee supplied was adulterated with animal fat ghee fflo:hasAdulterant beef tallow ghee could have contained beef tallow Tests by the National Dairy Development Board fflo:identifies foreign fats Tests by the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) later confirmed the presence of foreign fats Synthetic Ghee Adulteration Act prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba Organic Dairy front for manufacturing synthetic ghee Synthetic Ghee Adulteration Act prov:used ghee manufacturing synthetic ghee Synthetic Ghee Manufacturing Method fflo:hasFraudType Substitution never procured any milk or butter, yet somehow managed to supply ghee fflo:hasAdulterant foreign fats confirmed the presence of foreign fats in some samples ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Vyshnavi Dairy rejected stock was allegedly diverted to Vyshnavi Dairy ghee fflo:inputTo preparation of Tirupati laddus used to prepare the sacred Tirupati laddus Ajay Kumar Sugandh prov:wasAssociatedWith supply of synthetic ghee ingredients arrest of Ajay Kumar Sugandh, who supplied chemicals such as monodiglycerides Ajay Kumar Sugandh prov:wasAssociatedWith supply of synthetic ghee ingredients arrest of Ajay Kumar Sugandh, who supplied chemicals such as monodiglycerides and acetic acid esterscb:T1292,Rs 250-crore adulterated ghee sent to make Tirupati temple laddus from 2019 to 2024: SIT indianexpress.com Rs 250-crore adulterated ghee sent to make Tirupati temple laddus from 2019 to 2024: SIT
The tradition of the laddu prasadam of Lord Venkateswara is now more than 300 years old. The temple at Tirupati started offering the laddu as prasadam to devotees in 1715.
The Sri Venkateswara Swamy temple at Tirumala in Andhra Pradesh’s Tirupati district was supplied with adulterated ghee worth Rs 250.80 crore between 2019 and 2024, a Special Investigation Team (SIT) set up to investigate adulteration of the temple’s famous laddu prasadam has found.
The SIT was formed at the insistence of the Supreme Court.
SIT officials told The Indian Express that the adulterated ghee was allegedly supplied by Harsh Fresh Dairy products or Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Milk Pvt Ltd, and its subsidiaries — Vyshnavi Dairy Specialities Pvt Ltd, Malganga Milk and Agro Products Pvt Ltd, and AR Dairy Foods Pvt Ltd.
According to SIT officials, the adulteration was allegedly done at a plant in Bhagwanpur near Roorkee, Uttarakhand, by adding adulterants like palm oil, palm kernel oil and palmolein. These adulterants were mixed with “minimal quantity of ghee along with other chemicals including Beta-Carotene, Acetic Acid Ester, ghee flavor”, the SIT found.
Bhole Baba Diary directors Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain are among those who have been arrested in connection with the case.
The adulteration of the Tirupati temple’s laddu prasadam grabbed national attention after Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu said at a meeting of the NDA at Amaravati on September 18, 2024, “Even the Tirumala laddu was made with substandard ingredients… They used animal fat instead of ghee.”
From 2019 to 2023, the YSR Congress Party was in power in Andhra Pradesh.
The SIT probe has found that the main adulterant was plant-based ingredients. According to the SIT, the adulteration of prasadam had come to light in 2022, when the then Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam (TTD) chairman YV Subba Reddy found, by sending samples for testing, that the ghee was adulterated. “However, Subba Reddy allowed the adulterated ghee to be supplied to TTD till 2024,” SIT officials said.
The tradition of the laddu prasadam of Lord Venkateswara is now more than 300 years old. The temple at Tirupati started offering the laddu as prasadam to devotees in 1715.
The prasadam is prepared in a special kitchen known as Potu by laddu makers who belong to a particular sect that has been doing this work for centuries. The laddu makers have to shave their heads, and they have to wear a single clean cloth while in the kitchen.
Andhra Pradesh Minister Nara Lokesh, son of CM Naidu, said on X, “The Supreme Court-appointed SIT has exposed the truth. The guilty will face full weight of law. This isn’t adulteration — it is a deliberate assault on the faith of Hindus, a desecration of our belief, and a crime against the soul of Bharat. Those who played with the sacred must pay the price. Om Namo Venkatesaya.” ghee adulteration Beta-Carotene ghee flavor animal fat arrests investigation alleged Tirupati, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant Beta-Carotene These adulterants were mixed with “minimal quantity of ghee along with other chemicals including Beta-Carotene ghee fflo:hasAdulterant ghee flavor ghee flavor animal fat fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee They used animal fat instead of ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil adulterants like palm oil, palm kernel oil and palmolein ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm kernel oil adulterants like palm oil, palm kernel oil and palmolein ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palmolein adulterants like palm oil, palm kernel oil and palmolein ghee fflo:hasAdulterant Acetic Acid Ester other chemicals including Beta-Carotene, Acetic Acid Ester ghee adulteration at Bhagwanpur prov:wasAssociatedWith Harsh Fresh Dairy products adulterated ghee was allegedly supplied by Harsh Fresh Dairy products ghee adulteration at Bhagwanpur prov:wasAssociatedWith Vyshnavi Dairy Specialities Pvt Ltd adulteration was allegedly done at a plant in Bhagwanpur... subsidiaries — Vyshnavi Dairy Specialities Pvt Ltd Tirupati laddu adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Pomil Jain Bhole Baba Diary directors Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain are among those who have been arrested Tirupati laddu adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Vipin Jain Bhole Baba Diary directors Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain are among those who have been arrested Tirupati laddu fflo:hasAdulterant plant-based ingredients the main adulterant was plant-based ingredients ghee adulteration finding fflo:foundAtStep Distribution Subba Reddy allowed the adulterated ghee to be supplied to TTDcc:T16f0,Tirupati Temple Laddu Scam: Rs 250 Crore Worth Of Adulterated Ghee Fed To Devotees Over 5 years newsx.com A massive food adulteration scam has rocked the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD), the trust that manages the world-renowned Tirupati temple. A CBI-led Special Investigation Team (SIT) has uncovered that adulterated ghee worth nearly ₹250 crore was supplied to the temple and used to prepare the sacred Tirupati laddus consumed by millions of devotees over a period of five years from 2019 to 2024.
Dairy Accused of Supplying Fake Ghee Without Ever Buying Milk or Butter
The investigation identified Bhole Baba Organic Dairy, a unit located in Bhagwanpur, Haridwar (Uttarakhand), as the central player behind the fraud. According to the SIT, the dairy supplied approximately 68 lakh kilograms of ghee during these years, despite not procuring a single litre of milk or any butter essential ingredients required for genuine ghee production. Financial records and procurement documents were allegedly fabricated to create an illusion of legitimate dairy activity.
Palm Oil, Hydrogenated Fat, and Chemicals Used to Fake ‘Ghee’
The SIT revealed that the so-called ghee supplied to TTD was synthetic and chemically engineered. Instead of milk fat, the production relied on palm oil, palm kernel oil and hydrogenated fats. To imitate the colour and aroma of real ghee, additives such as beta-carotene and artificial “ghee essence” were used. Since TTD’s quality tests include the Reichert-Meissl (RM) value, a parameter used to verify genuine dairy fat content, the accused used acetic-acid esters and monodiglycerides to artificially inflate the RM value and clear laboratory checks.
Despite Blacklisting, Supplies Continued Through Front Companies
Although Bhole Baba Organic Dairy was blacklisted by TTD in 2022 following complaints of irregularities, the supply of adulterated ghee did not stop. The CBI discovered that the dairy continued to route ghee to the temple by using multiple front companies and proxies. Among them were Vyshnavi Dairy in Andhra Pradesh, Mal Ganga Dairy in Uttar Pradesh and AR Dairy Foods in Tamil Nadu. Invoices, e-way bills and logistic documents were allegedly falsified to conceal the origin of the product and bypass the blacklisting order.
Rejected Tankers Secretly Diverted; FSSAI Confirms Adulteration
In July 2024, TTD rejected four tankers of ghee after laboratory tests confirmed adulteration. Instead of returning these consignments to the supplier, the ghee was rerouted to another dairy and reintroduced into the supply chain a move now under investigation. The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), after parallel testing, confirmed that the product also contained traces of animal fat, escalating the matter from corruption to a serious violation of food safety norms and religious sanctity.
Devotees Outraged, TTD Officials to Be Questioned
The revelations have triggered public outrage, as Tirupati laddus are not merely a food product but are considered sacred prasad by lakhs of devotees who visit the temple every day. The CBI is now preparing to question senior TTD officials and employees of the Andhra Pradesh Dairy Development Department to examine how a scam of this scale could continue unchecked for five years despite tender rules and mandatory quality checks.
The SIT is likely to file further charges in the coming days. TTD officials have indicated that procurement and testing protocols will be strengthened to ensure that such violations never recur.
ALSO READ: Yogi Adityanath Makes ‘Vande Mataram’ Compulsory In Schools, Says ‘No Other Jinnah Can Rise…’
Sofia Babu Chacko is a journalist with over five years of experience reporting on Indian politics, crime, human rights, gender issues, and stories about marginalized communities. She believes journalism plays a crucial role in amplifying unheard voices and bringing attention to issues that truly matter. Sofia has contributed articles to The New Indian Express, Youth Ki Awaaz, and Maktoob Media. She is also a recipient of the 2025 Laadli Media Awards for gender sensitivity. Beyond the newsroom, she is a music enthusiast who enjoys singing. Connect with Sofia on X: https://x.com/SBCism ghee adulteration supplied approximately 68 lakh kilograms of ghee Bhole Baba Organic Dairy was blacklisted by TTD in 2022 following complaints of irregularities TTD rejected four tankers of ghee after laboratory tests confirmed adulteration pending_test India, Tirupati ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil production relied on palm oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm kernel oil production relied on palm oil, palm kernel oil and hydrogenated fats ghee fflo:hasAdulterant hydrogenated fats production relied on palm oil, palm kernel oil and hydrogenated fats ghee fflo:hasAdulterant beta-carotene additives such as beta-carotene and artificial ghee essence were used ghee fflo:hasAdulterant acetic-acid esters accused used acetic-acid esters and monodiglycerides to artificially inflate the RM value ghee fflo:hasAdulterant monodiglycerides used acetic-acid esters and monodiglycerides to artificially inflate the RM value Tirupati Ghee Adulteration Act prov:used ghee supplied approximately 68 lakh kilograms of ghee Adulteration of ghee at Tirupati Temple prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Bhole Baba Organic Dairy was blacklisted by TTD in 2022 following complaints of irregularities Ghee fflo:hasAdulterant Animal fat confirmed that the product also contained traces of animal fat Ghee fflo:hasAdulterant Adulterated substance TTD rejected four tankers of ghee after laboratory tests confirmed adulteration Ghee rerouting event fflo:carriedBy Ghee ghee was rerouted to another dairy and reintroduced into the supply chain Ghee adulteration finding fflo:foundIn Ghee laboratory tests confirmed adulterationcd:T57d,Adulterated Ghee worth Rs.250 Cr Supplied to TTD for Preparing Laddus deccanchronicle.com The investigators found that Sugandh supplied ghee through another agency for preparing laddu prasadam in Tirumala in Andhra Pradesh
Hyderabad: The ongoing probe by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) in coordination with Special Investigation Team (SIT) into the adulterated ghee supplied to Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) has found that an Uttarakhand-based dairy firm supplied 68 lakh kg of adulterated ghee worth Rs.250 crore to TTD.
The firm supplied it to TTD between 2019 and 2024. The CBI found this after arresting Ajay Kumar Sugandh. The investigators found that Sugandh supplied ghee through another agency for preparing laddu prasadam in Tirumala in Andhra Pradesh.
The ghee laced with chemicals was supplied to TTD for preparing laddus. The SIT started the probe after the case was registered as 470/24 at the Tirupati East police station in 2024. ghee adulteration chemicals arrest alleged Tirumala, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant chemicals ghee laced with chemicals Adulterated Ghee Supply to TTD prov:wasAssociatedWith Ajay Kumar Sugandh CBI found this after arresting Ajay Kumar Sugandh Adulterated Ghee Supply to TTD prov:used ghee supplied 68 lakh kg of adulterated ghee Supply of adulterated ghee to TTD prov:used ghee supplied 68 lakh kg of adulterated gheece:T137e,Tirupati Laddu Scam: SIT Arrests Delhi Trader For Supplying Chemicals Used In Fake Ghee newsx.com The Special Investigation Team (SIT) probing the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) laddu ghee adulteration scandal has arrested Delhi-based trader Ajay Kumar Sugandha, a key link in the fake ghee supply chain. Ajay Kumar, named A-16 in the case, allegedly supplied chemicals used to prepare adulterated ghee that was later sold to TTD under the labels Vaishnavi and AR Dairy.
According to investigators, Ajay Kumar, a long-time supplier to Bhole Baba Dairy, had been providing chemicals such as monoglycerides, acetic acid, and esters — compounds commonly used in the manufacturing of palm oil — for nearly seven years. These substances were reportedly mixed with palm oil to mimic the texture and aroma of pure cow ghee.
The SIT discovered that the chemicals, imported from South Korea by a Delhi-based distributor, were purchased through Ajay Kumar’s firm and routed to Bhole Baba Dairy directors Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain. The adulterated ghee produced from these ingredients eventually made its way into the sacred Tirupati laddus distributed to devotees.
The arrest marks a crucial breakthrough in the high-profile case that first erupted in September 2024, when Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N. Chandrababu Naidu alleged that ghee used in TTD laddus was contaminated with animal fat during the previous administration. The scandal prompted the state government and judiciary to set up a Special Investigation Team, tasked with examining procurement records, supplier contracts, and quality control procedures followed by the TTD.
Investigators have reportedly gathered substantial evidence, including financial transactions, supply invoices, and communication records, linking Ajay Kumar directly to the dairy’s operations. The SIT believes that over 90 percent of the ghee used in laddu preparation was adulterated with palm oil and chemical additives.
Ajay Kumar was detained in Delhi three days ago, brought to Tirupati for interrogation at the SIT office, and subsequently produced before the Nellore ACB court, which has remanded him to judicial custody till November 21.
The SIT continues to track other supply networks involved in the scam, as investigators tighten the probe into the multi-state adulteration racket that has shaken the sanctity of the world-famous Tirupati laddu.
Also Read: Tirupati Temple Laddu Scam: Rs 250 Crore Worth Of Adulterated Ghee Fed To Devotees Over 5 years
Zubair Amin is a Senior Journalist at NewsX with over seven years of experience in reporting and editorial work. He has written for leading national and international publications, including Foreign Policy Magazine, Al Jazeera, The Economic Times, The Indian Express, The Wire, Article 14, Mongabay, News9, among others. His primary focus is on international affairs, with a strong interest in US politics and policy. He also writes on West Asia, Indian polity, and constitutional issues. Zubair tweets at zubaiyr.amin ghee adulteration acetic acid palm oil arrest judicial custody alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant acetic acid providing chemicals such as monoglycerides, acetic acid, and esters — compounds commonly used in the manufacturing of palm oil — for nearly seven years. These substances were reportedly mixed with palm oil to mimic the texture and aroma of pure cow ghee. ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil ghee used in laddu preparation was adulterated with palm oil Tirupati Laddu Ghee Adulteration Act prov:wasAssociatedWith Ajay Kumar Sugandha arrested Delhi-based trader Ajay Kumar Sugandha, a key link in the fake ghee supply chain Tirupati Laddu Ghee Adulteration Act prov:used ghee supplied chemicals used to prepare adulterated ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant monoglycerides providing chemicals such as monoglycerides... mixed with palm oil to mimic... ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant esters providing chemicals such as monoglycerides, acetic acid, and esters ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod Chemical Mixing Method substances were reportedly mixed with palm oil to mimic the texture and aroma Chemical Mixing Method fflo:hasFraudType Substitution mixed with palm oil to mimic the texture and aroma of pure cow ghee Chemical Mixing Method fflo:hasFraudType Masking mixed with palm oil to mimic the texture and aroma of pure cow ghee Tirupati Laddu Ghee Adulteration Act prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba Dairy routed to Bhole Baba Dairy directors Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain ghee fflo:hasAdulterant chemical additives adulterated with palm oil and chemical additives Tirupati laddu fkg:hasIngredient ghee ghee used in TTD laddus judicial custody order fflo:issuedBy Nellore ACB court produced before the Nellore ACB court, which has remanded him to judicial custody ghee adulteration incident fflo:inRegion Andhra Pradesh Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N. Chandrababu Naidu alleged that ghee used in TTD laddus was contaminatedcf:T1862,SIT exposes how Bhole Baba dairy outwitted Tirupati trust, supplied 68 lakh kgs of spurious ghee for five yrs | Vijayawada News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Tirupati: The CBI-led special investigation team probing the Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration case has stumbled upon some shocking details following the arrest of A-16, Ajay Kumar Sugandh, who supplied various chemicals including monodiglycerides and acetic acid ester to Bhole Baba Oroganic dairy, contracted by the TTD to supply ghee to be used in the preparation of laddu prasadam.
The SIT had made several startling revelations in the remand report submitted to the Nellore ACB court. The SIT investigation revealed that Bhole Baba Oroganic dairy established by its promoters Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain at Bhagawanpur in Uttarakhand never procured a single drop of milk or butter from anywhere but yet managed to supply 68 lakh kgs of ghee to the 
Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams between 2019 and 2024.
During the course of the investigation, the SIT unravelled the end to end modus operandi of Bhole Baba dairy promoters, who managed to successfully con the richest Hindu temple trust for five long years. 
In the garb of a dairy unit, Bhole Baba promoters established a full fledged fake desi ghee manufacturing unit and managed to supply 68 lakh kgs of spurious ghee worth Rs.250 cr to the Tirupati trust. Investigation revealed that Bhole Baba dairy promoters created fake milk procurement and payment records but enquiries with the local milk farmers clearly established the fact that milk procurement was never done.
Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain purchased a nearby dairy sick unit and established Harsh fresh dairy at this sick unit, which is located about two kms away from Bhole Baba dairy plant. 
Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain procured large quantities of palm oil and palm kernel oil in the name of Harsh fresh dairy from Delhi based Budges and Budges company, a large importer of palm oil from Malaysia.
They also sourced various other chemicals such as mono glycerides, acetic acid ester, lactic acid, beta carotene, artificial ghee essence etc. from suppliers like Ajay Kumar Sugandh and Delhi based Aristo chemicals. 
The palm oil and palm kernel oil and other chemicals were shifted in batches from Harsh fresh dairy to Bhole Baba main plant, where the Bhole Baba dairy promoters got down to the business of manufacturing spurious ghee on a commercial scale. 
How they made the fake desi ghee
The process starts with the refined oils - palm oil and palm kernel oil melted and thickened with hydrogenated fats. 
They then add a perfect dose of beta carotene to derive that sunlit yellow glow and drops of ghee essence are added to the mix to get the synthetic aroma that mimics original ghee's nutty toasted fragrance. 
The lactic acid esters of mono and diglycerides are also added to the mix to function as an emulsifier and an aerating agent, to help achieve the desired texture, consistency and shelf life in the synthetic ghee.
Once this process is completed, the result is a perfectly convincing imposter that looks and smells like ghee but is not the actual ghee. 
The SIT chargesheet revealed that Bhole Baba dairy promoters, who were aware of the fact that the Tirupati trust conducts the Reichert-Miessl (RM) value tests to check for any adulteration in the ghee, indiscriminately used acetic acid esters to boost RM value in the synthetic ghee as TTD doesn't accept ghee stocks which are less than 26 in RM value.
Bhole Baba dairy procured various chemicals including acetic acid ester worth about Rs 7 cr from A-16 Ajay Kumar Sugandh between 2022 and 2024. 
While Bhole Baba dairy got disqualified and blacklisted in 2022, they continued to supply spurious ghee to the TTD by successfully bidding for TTD ghee supply contracts through other dairies including Tirupati district based Vyshnavi dairy, UP based Mal Ganga and Tamil Nadu based AR dairy foods. 
SIT investigations also exposed that Bhole Baba dairy supplied synthetic/spurious ghee in large containers to Vyshnavi dairy, Mal Ganga dairy and to AR dairy through Vyshnavi dairy. 
Once the synthetic ghee stocks arrived, Vyshnavi dairy, Mal Ganga dairy and AR foods changed the labels and carried out extensive fake documentation to generate invoices, e-way bills etc and then supplied the same spurious ghee in smaller tankers to TTD in the prescribed format as per the contract terms, the chargesheet alleged. ghee adulteration substitution palm oil palm kernel oil mono glycerides acetic acid ester lactic acid beta carotene artificial ghee essence arrest disqualification blacklisting alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India manufacturing spurious ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba dairy promoters Bhole Baba dairy promoters got down to the business of manufacturing spurious ghee Bhole Baba Oroganic dairy prov:wasAssociatedWith Pomil Jain Bhole Baba Oroganic dairy established by its promoters Pomil Jain manufacturing spurious ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith Vipin Jain Bhole Baba dairy promoters got down to the business of manufacturing spurious ghee spurious ghee fflo:hasAdulterant mono glycerides sourced various other chemicals such as mono glycerides spurious ghee fflo:hasAdulterant acetic acid ester sourced various other chemicals such as mono glycerides, acetic acid ester spurious ghee fflo:hasAdulterant artificial ghee essence sourced various other chemicals such as mono glycerides, acetic acid ester, lactic acid, beta carotene, artificial ghee essence beta carotene fflo:hasFunction fflo:Colourant add a perfect dose of beta carotene to derive that sunlit yellow glow lactic acid esters of mono and diglycerides fflo:hasFunction fflo:Emulsifier lactic acid esters of mono and diglycerides are also added to the mix to function as an emulsifier lactic acid esters of mono and diglycerides fflo:hasFunction fflo:Emulsifier function as an emulsifier and an aerating agent ghee fflo:hasPermissibleLimit Reichert-Miessl value limit of 26 TTD doesn't accept ghee stocks which are less than 26 in RM value synthetic ghee manufacturing fflo:hasFraudType fflo:Substitution result is a perfectly convincing imposter that looks and smells like ghee but is not the actual gheed0:Tbdb,CBI’s SIT finds TTD received adulterated ghee for over five years thehindu.com T
The Special Investigation Team (SIT) probing the ghee adulteration case under the supervision of the CBI has found that the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) received supplies of adulterated ghee for over five years.
The arrest of Ajay Kumar Sugandh, named as A-16 in the case, has revealed disturbing details, including the use of chemicals such as monodiglycerides and acetic acid ester by Bhole Baba Dairy, which had a contract to supply ghee to the TTD.
In its remand report submitted to the ACB Court in Nellore, the SIT noted that the dairy, established at Bhagawanpur in Uttarakhand, had managed to supply an estimated 68 lakh kilograms of ghee to the TTD between 2019 and 2024—despite not procuring a single drop of milk or butter from any source in the country.
Investigations revealed that the promoters had set up a shell unit solely to supply spurious ghee worth ₹250 crore to the TTD during the period. The milk procurement and payment records produced by the Bhole Baba Dairy promoters were found to be fabricated, as local cattle rearers confirmed they had never supplied milk to the company.
The promoters reportedly purchased a defunct dairy unit nearby and procured palm oil and kernel oil under the name of Harsh Fresh Dairy from a Delhi-based importer of Malaysian palm oil. Using these oils and other chemicals, the dairy manufactured spurious ghee exclusively for supply to the TTD.
The investigators also found that the producers had indiscriminately used acetic acid esters in the final product to manipulate the RM (Reichert-Meissl) value—an essential parameter in the adulteration tests conducted by the TTD’s quality control team. Notably, Bhole Baba Dairy procured acetic acid ester worth ₹7 crore from Ajay Sugandh between 2022 and 2024 alone.
Shockingly, even after being blacklisted by the TTD in 2022, Bhole Baba Dairy continued to supply adulterated ghee by routing its bids through other dairies, including Vyshnavi Dairy of Tirupati, Mal Ganga Dairy of Uttar Pradesh, and AR Dairy Foods of Tamil Nadu.
Published - November 09, 2025 08:51 pm IST ghee adulteration investigation pending_test India, Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) ghee adulteration act prov:used ghee supplies of adulterated ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant monodiglycerides use of chemicals such as monodiglycerides ghee fflo:hasAdulterant acetic acid ester use of chemicals such as monodiglycerides and acetic acid ester ghee adulteration method fflo:hasFraudType Substitution not procuring a single drop of milk or butter supplying spurious ghee via shell unit fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional set up a shell unit solely to supply spurious ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant acetic acid ester used acetic acid esters in the final product Bhole Baba Dairy prov:wasAssociatedWith Ajay Sugandh procured acetic acid ester worth ₹7 crore from Ajay Sugandh ghee fflo:hasAdulterant acetic acid ester used acetic acid esters in the final productd1:Ta5a,YV Subba Reddy’s role found to be suspicious in TTD ghee adulteration case: SIT newindianexpress.com VIJAYAWADA: The Special Investigation Team (SIT) constituted by the Supreme Court under the supervision of the CBI Director General, has informed the AP High Court that the role of former TTD chairman and YSRCP Rajya Sabha MP YV Subba Reddy appears to be ‘suspicious’ in the case related to the alleged supply of adulterated ghee to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD).
In its counter affidavit filed in the HC, SIT stated that it had sought the bank account details of Subba Reddy, and his wife Yerram Swarnalatha Reddy as part of the investigation.
SIT sought the dismissal of the petition filed by the couple, challenging its demand for their bank transaction details.
SIT noted that Subba Reddy who served as the TTD Chairman from 2019 to 2023, suggested that ghee samples from suppliers be sent to Mysore’s CFTRI lab for testing following an anonymous complaint to the TTD Procurement GM RSVR Subrahmanyam, on May 16, 2022.
Samples taken from Premier Agri Foods Pvt Ltd, Vaishnavi Dairy Specialities Ltd and Bhole Baba Dairy were sent to the CFTRI. The lab report received in August 2022 showed that all samples contained vegetable oil, confirming the adulteration. “Despite this, no action was taken against the dairies. Moreover, Premier Agri Foods and Vaishnavi Dairy were allowed to continue supplying ghee until 2024, while Bhole Baba Dairy was allowed till October 2022,” SIT informed.
It further stated that Bhole Baba Dairy director Pamil Jain met Subba Reddy at his Hyderabad camp office on May 25, 2022, and complained that the chairman’s personal assistant Chinna Appanna was demanding Rs 25 per kg commission for approving the supply of ghee. Later, the case was rescheduled to November 14. ghee adulteration samples sent to CFTRI lab for testing lab_confirmed India, Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable oil lab report received in August 2022 showed that all samples contained vegetable oil vegetable oil fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee samples contained vegetable oil, confirming the adulteration ghee adulteration analysis fso:isPerformedAt CFTRI lab ghee samples from suppliers be sent to Mysore's CFTRI lab for testing TTD ghee adulteration finding fflo:identifies vegetable oil lab report received in August 2022 showed that all samples contained vegetable oil TTD ghee adulteration finding fflo:foundIn ghee lab report received in August 2022 showed that all samples contained vegetable oil Bhole Baba Dairy prov:wasAssociatedWith Pamil Jain Bhole Baba Dairy director Pamil Jaind2:T10b2,Adulterated Ghee Made with Animal Fat Seized in Pithapuram deccanchronicle.com Municipal official Prabhakara Rao, revenue inspector Venkatesh, and other staff participated in the operation.
Kakinada: Revenue, municipal and police officials jointly seized 21 cans of adulterated ghee allegedly made using cow and other animal fat at Pithapuram on Thursday. The raids were conducted following a complaint from Vishwa Hindu Parishad (VHP) state president Duvva Venkateswara Rao.
Pithapuram sub-inspector Manikumar said the seized samples would be sent to food safety authorities for testing. Municipal official Prabhakara Rao, revenue inspector Venkatesh, and other staff participated in the operation.
VHP leader Venkateswara Rao condemned the sale of adulterated ghee and oil near the famous temple during the auspicious Karthika Masa, alleging official negligence and collusion with manufacturers despite repeated complaints.
New AP Chambers team takes charge in Visakhapatnam
The Andhra Pradesh Chambers of Commerce and Industry Federation (AP Chambers) formally inducted its Visakhapatnam Zone Committee for the 2025–27 term at a ceremony held in the city on Thursday.
P. Sobhan Prakash assumed charge as chairperson of the Visakhapatnam Zone, with G. Shiva Kumar and M. V. Pavan Kartheek appointed as vice-chairmen, while Dr Srivalli Korrapati took over as head of the newly constituted Women’s Wing.
Dr Jitendra Sharma, Managing Director and Founder-CEO of AP MedTech Zone Ltd, attended as chief guest and emphasised the importance of innovation and collaboration in boosting regional economic growth. Dr Rayapati Sailaja, Chairperson of the AP State Women’s Commission, launched the Women’s Wing and called for greater participation of women in business leadership.
AP Chambers president Potluri Bhaskara Rao, who attended as guest of honour, outlined the federation’s strategic vision for advancing trade and industry across Andhra Pradesh. The new committee pledged to strengthen entrepreneurship, tourism, and industrial development, with a focus on supporting MSMEs and large-scale enterprises.
Collector ensures nutritious, hygienic meals in schools
West Godavari district collector Chadalawada Nagarani on Thursday intensified a district-wide inspection drive to strengthen the Dokka Seethamma Midday Meal Scheme, ensuring nutritious and hygienic meals in government schools.
Mandal-level special officers, tahsildars and MPDOs inspected schools across the district, tasting food and interacting with students. The collector made a surprise visit to PSM Girls’ High School in Gunupudi, where she personally sampled the midday meal and expressed satisfaction with the food quality and hygiene.
Sitting with students, Nagarani urged them to eat nutritious meals daily, highlighting the importance of a balanced diet for mental and physical growth. She said that regular consumption of eggs and pulses builds strength and concentration. She advised parents to encourage children, especially girls, to eat at school every day.
She directed school managements to maintain strict cleanliness in kitchens, follow food safety norms, and adopt hygienic methods for cleaning utensils.
Youth kills father over marriage dispute
A youth murdered his father following a dispute over dowry demands related to his sister’s marriage at Thorredu village in Rajamahendravaram Rural mandal on Thursday.
According to Rajanagaram police, the accused, Vodisala Saikumar, quarrelled with his father Vodisala Appa Rao, an auto driver, after the latter rejected a marriage proposal demanding ₹2 lakh dowry for his younger daughter.
In a fit of rage, Saikumar allegedly banged his father’s head against a wall, locked his mother and sister in a room, and then slit his father’s throat, killing him on the spot.
Rajanagaram circle inspector Prasanna Veeraiah Gowd registered a case and shifted the body to the government hospital in Rajamahendravaram for post-mortem examination. ghee adulteration animal fat seizure alleged Pithapuram, West Godavari, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat adulterated ghee allegedly made using cow and other animal fat animal fat fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee adulterated ghee allegedly made using cow and other animal fatd3:T9a9,Indore News: Food Officials Seized 600 Liters Of Adulterated Ghee, Oil freepressjournal.in Indore (Madhya Pradesh): Food and Drug Administration officials carried out another major action on second day of their ongoing drive and seized a large quantity of adulterated ghee and oil from a manufacturing unit in city on Friday.
On instructions from district collector Shivam Verma, the team raided a house located on 60 Feet Road in Palhar Nagar, where a man named Giriraj Gupta runs a shop called Prabhushree Traders.
During inspection, the team found a large quantity of vanaspati (vegetable fat), edible oil, essence and ghee. They also recovered packaging material of popular brands that were being used to repack locally made adulterated ghee.
The food safety officers collected six samples of ghee, oil and essence for testing. In total, the team seized 27 cans of vanaspati, 13 cans of oil, 3 cans of ghee, 5 bottles of essence and around 350 wrappers.
Food Officer Manish Swami said that the manufacturing premises have been sealed. The unit was found producing and packing ghee under fake labels of Sanchi, Amul, Nova, and Malwa. Around 600 litres of ghee and oil were seized and the collected samples have been sent to the State Food Testing Laboratory in Bhopal for detailed examination. ghee adulteration seizure pending_test Indore (, Madhya Pradesh, India, Indore (Madhya Pradesh) Adulteration at Prabhushree Traders prov:wasAssociatedWith Giriraj Gupta man named Giriraj Gupta runs a shop called Prabhushree Traders Adulteration at Prabhushree Traders prov:used ghee seized a large quantity of adulterated ghee Adulteration at Prabhushree Traders prov:used edible oil seized a large quantity of adulterated ghee and oil Adulteration at Prabhushree Traders prov:used vanaspati found a large quantity of vanaspati Packing ghee under fake labels fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling producing and packing ghee under fake labels Repackaging locally made ghee fflo:hasFraudType Substitution repack locally made adulterated ghee Adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt Processing seized a large quantity of adulterated ghee and oil from a manufacturing unit Seizure of 600 Liters fflo:targets vanaspati seized 27 cans of vanaspati Seizure of 600 Liters fflo:targets ghee seized 600 litres of ghee and oil Seizure of 600 Liters fflo:inRegion Madhya Pradesh Indore (Madhya Pradesh) Seizure of 600 Liters fflo:inRegion Palhar Nagar raided a house located on 60 Feet Road in Palhar Nagard4:Tc12,TTD ghee adulteration case: SIT arrests close aide of former Chairman Y.V. Subba Reddy thehindu.com T
The Special Investigation Team (SIT) probing the alleged ghee adulteration case has arrested Chinna Appanna, a close aide and former personal assistant of TTD’s former Trust Board Chairman and Rajya Sabha member Y.V. Subba Reddy.
Mr. Appanna has been named as accused No. 24 in the case being investigated by the team led by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI).
He was arrested at Alipiri here on Thursday, produced before the ACB court in Nellore, and sent to judicial remand till November 11.
According to the investigation, Mr. Appanna allegedly sought details of all the ghee suppliers from the general manager of the TTD’s procurement wing, and contacted some of them, demanding a commission of ₹25 per kg of ghee supplied to the TTD.
When representatives of the Bhole Baba dairy declined to pay the commission, Mr. Appanna allegedly insisted upon the officials to conduct a physical inspection of their plant once again, in a bid to get them disqualified from participating in future tenders. He also allegedly sent anonymous letters to the TTD against the dairy.
After the Bhole Baba dairy got eliminated from the further round of tenders, Mr. Appanna allegedly played a key role in getting Premier Agri Foods into the ring, which quoted a price of ₹467 per kg of ghee, a whopping ₹138/kg higher than the previous supplier Bhole Baba dairy’s ₹329.
After inspecting Mr. Appanna’s call records and bank statements, the officials found that he had received kickbacks to the tune of ₹50 lakh in various forms, including Hawala channels.
‘Vegetable fats’
The SIT officials found that the ghee samples collected from various suppliers at the behest of Mr. Subba Reddy were sent to the CFTRI-Mysuru for adulteration checks in 2022, which revealed the presence of vegetable fats (Vanaspati). However, no action had been taken against the companies, which continued to supply the same ghee till 2024.
Between 2022 and 2024, around 68 lakh kg of “adulterated ghee” worth ₹250 crore was supplied to the TTD, with the contractors supplying the same at ₹400/kg, which had been procured at ₹250/kg, the investigating team found.
Published - October 30, 2025 08:05 pm IST ghee adulteration substitution vegetable fats Vanaspati arrest judicial remand alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India TTD ghee adulteration case prov:used ghee alleged ghee adulteration case adulteration checks fso:isPerformedAt CFTRI-Mysuru sent to the CFTRI-Mysuru for adulteration checks ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable fats revealed the presence of vegetable fats (Vanaspati) ghee adulteration finding fflo:foundAtStep Distribution ghee samples collected from various suppliers IncidentFinding_VegetableFats fflo:identifies vegetable fats revealed the presence of vegetable fats IncidentFinding_VegetableFats fflo:foundIn ghee ghee samples ... revealed the presence of vegetable fats ghee fflo:hasAdulterant Vanaspati revealed the presence of vegetable fats (Vanaspati)d5:T143b,Tirupati Laddu ghee adulteration case: CBI led SIT arrests former TTD chairman YV Subba Reddyâ_x0080__x0099_s close aide Chinna Appanna | Vijayawada News - The Times of India indiatimes.com TIRUPATI: The CBI led SIT arrested former TTD chairman and Rajya Sabha MP YV Subba Reddyâs close aide Chinna Appanna in connection with the Tirupati Laddu ghee adulteration case in the late hours on Wednesday. 
He was produced before the ACB court at Nellore and subsequently sent to judicial remand till Nov 11. 
The CBI led SIT has named Chinna Appanna as Accused No.24 in the case following a detailed investigation leading to his arrest.
During the course of the SIT investigation, it emerged that in 2022, Chinna Appanna approached TTDâs procurement dept general manager (GM) and took details of all ghee suppliers to the TTD. 
He then dialled PP Srinivas of Bhole Baba dairy and allegedly demanded a commission of Rs.25 per kg of ghee supplied to the TTD. But when the management of the Bhole Baba dairy refused to agree to pay the demanded commission, he pressurized the TTDâs GM (procurement) to conduct a second physical inspection of their plant against the TTD rules with an attempt to get them disqualified in the national ghee supply tenders to be floated shortly. 
Chinna Appanna was also involved in sending anonymous petitions against Bhole Baba dairy to the TTD in a bid to get them disqualified and at this point of time, Bhole Baba was supplying ghee to the TTD at Rs.329/KG.
Further investigations revealed that, Chinna Appanna then got acquainted with Premier Agri foods company and struck a deal. As Bhole Baba dairy got eliminated from the tenders, Premier Agri foods took undue advantage of the situation and quoted a price of Rs.467/kg (Rs.138/kg higher than the price of Bhole Baba) and yet got the ghee supply contract from the TTD. 
During the course of the investigation, it was established that Chinna Appanna received kickbacks worth approximately Rs.50 lakh in different tranches of transactions. This money was reportedly routed to him through a Hawala agent linked to Premier Alpha company. 
Analysis of his phone and call records also established that Chinna Appanna was in constant touch with the promoters of Premier Agri foods. The SIT has also examined his bank statements.
According to reliable sources, the SIT will soon seek the custody of Chinna Appanna for questioning to establish the larger conspiracy in the sacred Tirupati Laddu ghee adulteration case. 
Meanwhile, SIT investigations also revealed that in 2022, the then TTD chairman YV Subba Reddy, directed the officials to send ghee samples of all suppliers including Bhole Baba, Premier Agri foods, Vyshnavi dairy and others for adulteration checks to outside labs and when samples were sent to CFTRI-Mysuru, lab reports confirmed that the ghee supplied by all the companies were found to be adulterated with vegetable fats (Vanaspati). 
Despite lab reports confirming adulteration of ghee supplied to the TTD, no action was taken and information was suppressed and all the ghee contractors continued to supply adulterated ghee to the TTD from 2022-2024 despite the exposure of the adulteration. 
The SIT investigation also found out that during this period 68 lakh kgs of adulterated ghee worth approximately Rs.250 cr was supplied to the TTD. Investigations also revealed that the contractors were minting profits at Rs.250/kg by supplying adulterated ghee at approximately Rs.400 to the Tirupati trust. 
While the SIT named 15 accused in the first chargesheet filed before the court earlier, nine new accused including former TTD chiefâs close aide Chinna Appanna have been named in the case as the investigation now is learnt to be heading towards exposing the larger conspiracy in the Tirupati Laddu-ghee adulteration case. ghee adulteration vegetable fats arrest judicial remand lab_confirmed Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India Tirupati Laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Chinna Appanna Chinna Appanna for questioning to establish the larger conspiracy in the sacred Tirupati Laddu ghee adulteration case ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable fats ghee supplied by all the companies were found to be adulterated with vegetable fats vegetable fats fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee the ghee supplied by all the companies were found to be adulterated with vegetable fats (Vanaspati) adulteration of ghee with vegetable fats fflo:supportedBy lab reports lab reports confirmed that the ghee supplied by all the companies were found to be adulterated with vegetable fats (Vanaspati) ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable fats ghee supplied by all the companies were found to be adulterated with vegetable fats Chinna Appanna prov:wasAssociatedWith Premier Agri foods Chinna Appanna then got acquainted with Premier Agri foods company and struck a deal adulteration checks fso:isPerformedAt CFTRI-Mysuru samples were sent to CFTRI-Mysuru, lab reports confirmed adulteration of ghee fflo:foundIn ghee ghee supplied by all the companies were found to be adulterated adulteration of ghee fflo:foundAtStep Distribution ghee contractors continued to supply adulterated ghee to the TTDd6:Tf1e,SIT Arrests Subba Reddy’s Ex-PA in TTD Adulterated Ghee Case deccanchronicle.com The case dates back to the period when Subba Reddy chaired the TTD board, during which Bholebaba Dairy, based in Uttarakhand, supplied ghee for the Tirumala laddus.
Tirupati: The Special Investigation Team (SIT) on Wednesday night arrested Appanna, former personal assistant to YSRC Rajya Sabha member and ex-TTD chairman Y.V. Subba Reddy, in connection with the adulterated ghee supply case linked to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD). He was produced before the ACB court in Nellore later that night and was remanded to 14 days’ judicial custody.
The arrest marks the first political link in the TTD ghee adulteration case that occurred during the YSR Congress regime. Appanna, a native of Vizianagaram district, had served as Subba Reddy’s personal assistant from 2014, when he was elected as Ongole MP, until the 2024 elections. He had also worked as protocol officer on special duty (OSD) at Andhra Pradesh Bhavan in Delhi during the YSRC regime.
The case dates back to the period when Subba Reddy chaired the TTD board, during which Bholebaba Dairy, based in Uttarakhand, supplied ghee for the Tirumala laddus. After quality concerns were raised, the dairy was blacklisted but allegedly continued supplying adulterated ghee through proxy dairies. Tamil Nadu-based AR Dairy later secured the contract, reportedly using adulterated stock routed through Sri Vaishnavi Dairy in Tirupati district.
According to SIT officials, Appanna is suspected to have played a role in a larger conspiracy behind the supply of adulterated ghee to the TTD. The SIT’s remand report mentions that in 2022, he allegedly contacted the then TTD procurement general manager and the management of Bholebaba Dairy, demanding a commission of ₹25 per kg of ghee. When the dairy reportedly refused, he is suspected to have conspired to get it blacklisted. Investigators allege that Appanna influenced officials to conduct inspections and facilitated anonymous complaints, leading to Bholebaba Dairy’s disqualification. Following this, Premier Agrifoods obtained the ghee contract despite quoting ₹138 higher per unit. The SIT has named Appanna as the 24th accused in the charge sheet.
Investigators suspect that Appanna played a role in helping non-qualified dairies secure TTD contracts in exchange for commissions. SIT records show that he was questioned at the Tirupati SIT office for two days in June 2025. He subsequently approached the High Court, which on July 10, 2025, stayed the SIT probe.
Following a Supreme Court directive in the last week of September 2025, the investigation was resumed. Appanna was questioned again over the past two days, and, according to officials, his non-cooperation during interrogation led to his arrest.
Discussions are now under way on whether Subba Reddy, who chaired the TTD Board when the disputed supplies were approved, will be summoned for questioning. ghee adulteration adulterated ghee arrest blacklist alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant adulterated ghee continued supplying adulterated ghee supply of adulterated ghee to the TTD prov:wasAssociatedWith Appanna Appanna is suspected to have played a role in a larger conspiracy behind the supply of adulterated ghee supply of adulterated ghee to the TTD prov:wasAssociatedWith Appanna Appanna is suspected to have played a role in a larger conspiracy behind the supply of adulterated ghee TTD ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Sri Vaishnavi Dairy using adulterated stock routed through Sri Vaishnavi Dairy AR Dairy fflo:foundAt Tamil Nadu Tamil Nadu-based AR Dairy Appanna prov:wasAssociatedWith conspiracy behind the supply of adulterated ghee Appanna is suspected to have played a role in a larger conspiracy behind the supply of adulterated gheed7:Ta07,Indore News: About 3400 Litres Of Fake Ghee Seized From A Factory freepressjournal.in Indore (Madhya Pradesh): The food safety department raided a fake ghee manufacturing unit in the Palda area and seized about 3400 litres of ghee on Wednesday. The officials said that the ghee is adulterated. However, the sample is being sent to the state food testing laboratory.
According to the officials, the raid took place at Shree Ram Milk Food Dairy, where officials found loose and packed ghee sold under the brand name Mother Choice.
Acting on a tip-off received by collector Shivam Verma, the food safety team conducted the operation on Wednesday and collected several samples for testing.
Officials said the ghee was made using palm oil and other low-quality substances but was falsely labelled and sold as pure cow ghee. Manufacturing equipment, raw materials and packaging machines were also seized.
Samples have been sent to the State Food Testing Laboratory in Bhopal and the value of the seized ghee is around Rs 17 lakh. Legal action will follow once the lab confirms adulteration.
This action is part of an ongoing campaign against food adulteration in the city. Recently, officials seized over 3000 kilograms of mawa and ghee from two buses arriving from Gwalior and Ahmedabad. In another case, officials had seized over 2,700 kilograms of unlicensed sweets worth lakhs of rupees. from a shop in Prem Nagar. ghee adulteration substitution mislabeling palm oil raid seizure alleged Indore, Madhya Pradesh, India fake ghee manufacturing prov:used ghee fake ghee manufacturing unit ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil ghee was made using palm oil palm oil fflo:isSubstituteFor cow ghee ghee was made using palm oil and other low-quality substances but was falsely labelled and sold as pure cow ghee fake ghee manufacturing prov:wasAssociatedWith Shree Ram Milk Food Dairy raid took place at Shree Ram Milk Food Dairy using palm oil and other low-quality substances fflo:hasFraudType Substitution made using palm oil and other low-quality substances but was falsely labelled and sold as pure cow ghee falsely labelling ghee as pure cow ghee fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling falsely labelled and sold as pure cow ghee falsely labelling ghee as pure cow ghee fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional falsely labelled and sold as pure cow ghee ghee sample analysis fso:isPerformedAt State Food Testing Laboratory in Bhopal Samples have been sent to the State Food Testing Laboratory in Bhopal ghee sample analysis fso:isPerformedOn ghee sample collected several samples for testingd8:T2a7c,Unsafe to Eat: India’s Chronic Food Adulteration Problem thehindu.com Every year, in the lead-up to the annual festive season of Navratri, followed by Diwali, headlines fixate on the plummeting air quality index. Yet, they are invariably accompanied by reports that portend something far more serious: food adulteration and contamination.
In September, as Navratri began, hundreds of people were hospitalised after consuming adulterated flour. Nearly 400 residents across north and north-west Delhi were admitted to Babu Jagjivan Ram Hospital. The following month, Delhi Police seized nearly 6,800 units of adulterated ghee and sweets during six separate raids. Furthermore, approximately 2,000 kilograms of spurious sweets were found in a raid carried out in Raghubir Nagar.
This malaise is not confined to Delhi but plagues several northern States. In Punjab’s Faridkot, the Health and Police Departments confiscated 1,800 kg of suspected adulterated sweets. Likewise, in Lucknow, the Food Safety and Drug Administration seized and incinerated nearly 1,700 kg of tainted food items. In Noida and Ghaziabad, over 1,100 kg of contaminated food products were disposed of following inspections.
However, food adulteration is not a seasonal aberration tied to festive demand in the country but a persistent problem. The recurring raids, seizures, and public health scares merely scratch the surface of a deep-seated crisis.
Entrenched crisis
According to Ashim Sanyal, Chief Operating Officer of Voluntary Organisation in Interest of Consumer Education (VOICE), food adulteration contributes to a majority of chronic diseases. Speaking to Frontline, he said: “When we talk about diseases, the most common are stomach-related ailments, followed by serious conditions affecting the heart and kidneys. These organs are among the first to be impacted when adulterated food is consumed. Essentially, the entire food chain within the body—from the mouth to the stomach, pancreas, and kidneys—comes under strain.”
He added: “Adulteration acts as a form of slow poisoning. It doesn’t trigger an immediate reaction but gradually debilitates the body over time. That’s why you rarely come across reports of hundreds being hospitalised due to adulteration—it doesn’t manifest as an instant crisis. But that doesn’t mean the problem doesn’t exist; it’s simply insidious rather than abrupt.”
Sanyal also pointed out: “Immediate poisoning occurs when food is contaminated, and contamination is fundamentally different from adulteration.”
Also Read | Deadly doses
He added that it is often exceedingly difficult even for doctors to judge whether common symptoms such as nausea, stomach ache, and diarrhoea stem from food adulteration or contamination.
“Unless the reaction is immediate and the patient receives medical attention right away, doctors rarely conduct tests specifically for adulteration. We know what adulterants exist, and theoretically, it’s easy to test for them—but that’s not how it works in practice. This is why the actual magnitude of adulteration is extremely difficult to quantify. Only when someone becomes critically ill and is hospitalised does the issue come to light.”
There are incidents where school children fall sick after midday meals or guests at mass weddings suffer food poisoning, and these are isolated outbreaks. “But regular consumers like us, who unknowingly consume adulterated products, don’t feel the impact immediately. Minor symptoms like nausea, stomach pain, or diarrhoea are usually self-medicated and dismissed. As a result, the scale, intensity, and pervasiveness of adulteration in the food supply remain largely unknown,” Sanyal said.
Exports under scanner
According to him, spices are commonly adulterated throughout the year, not just during the festive season. “And it has now been established not only by India but also by Singapore and several European Union (EU) nations that rejected and returned consignments of Indian spices. The US was the latest to do so.”
Last year, a report released by Hong Kong’s Centre for Food Safety, its official food regulatory body, said that three spice products from India contained traces of ethylene oxide, a known carcinogen. Between 2019 and 2024, the EU flagged over 400 Indian products for containing lethal contaminants, reporting that these spices harboured hazardous concentrations of heavy metals such as lead, mercury, and cadmium.
In response to growing concerns over potential public health risks, the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) asserted that adequate measures had been instituted to ensure the safety of food products in the country, and that action would be initiated against non-compliant food business operators. However, the authority acknowledged that food products destined for export were beyond its jurisdiction. Queries sent to FSSAI by Frontline did not elicit a response.
FSSAI’s strengths and weaknesses
The FSSAI is the principal nodal agency entrusted with overseeing food safety and standards in the country. Constituted under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006, it functions as the central authority for all matters pertaining to food regulation and safety. The agency also coordinates with State-level food safety authorities to ensure uniform enforcement across the country.
Sanyal said that, in principle, the FSSAI is structurally robust, but the real challenge lies in implementation and enforcement of rules. “Implementation and enforcement are both State subjects. This means some States excel in carrying out these functions, while others struggle, depending on the number of food safety officers they have and the volume of samples they collect. Authorities usually become active during the festive season, but even then, the quantity of samples collected is negligible. It appears substantial on paper but, in reality, represents only a fraction of the total adulteration.”
According to him, the shift from the previous Prevention of Food Adulteration Act (PFA) to the Food Safety and Standards Act was a pivotal transformation since the FSSAI issues monetary penalties, whereas the PFA mandated imprisonment as well.
Consumer activists often argue that monetary penalties are often insufficient, as most operators have already amassed profits far exceeding the fines imposed on them. Sanyal said that one of the main impediments to effective regulation and enforcement was the acute shortage of manpower and financial resources. “Both are in short supply. The shortage of personnel and limited financial capacity undermine the ability to ensure effective compliance and oversight.”
Deceptive marketing
Nemthianngai Guite, Associate Professor, Centre of Social Medicine and Community Health, Jawaharlal Nehru University, said that the issue extends far beyond regulation and is deeply compounded by the deceptive marketing of many products.
Speaking to Frontline, Guite said: “So-called “health foods” or supplements for children contain high levels of sugar. Yet they are marketed in a way that convinces the general public they are the best option for children. This is where multiple agencies need to step in and scrutinise the process.”
Also Read | India’s hunger games: Denying data won’t feed the masses
She added: “It’s not just about the regulatory framework, which operates at a macro level. In a country like India, the regulatory framework is weak and often compromised, and much of the adulteration stems directly from corruption. Food labelling norms are routinely circumvented, and markets are manipulated to project misleading claims. The consequences are evident in the surge of chronic diseases, ranging from cancer and cardiovascular disorders to liver and kidney ailments, largely because the food we consume today is riddled with adulterants.”
According to her, for any institution or agency to be truly effective, there must be greater awareness among the general population. “A vast section of the population is often misled by deceptive labels, particularly in urban areas. In contrast, rural communities, which have limited access to processed and fast food, tend to have better health outcomes in terms of chronic diseases. You see fewer cases of cardiovascular ailments, cancer, and other illnesses directly linked to dietary patterns there. In cities, however, we are grappling with obesity and an overconsumption of ultra-processed foods. The broader pattern reflects a food system designed to make such products easily accessible, readily available, and deceptively affordable,” she added. ghee sweets adulteration seizure alleged Delhi, India seizure of adulterated ghee and sweets fflo:issuedBy Delhi Police Delhi Police seized nearly 6,800 units of adulterated ghee and sweets confiscation of suspected adulterated sweets fflo:issuedBy Health and Police Departments Health and Police Departments confiscated 1,800 kg of suspected adulterated sweets rejection of Indian spices by EU nations fflo:inRegion European Union several European Union (EU) nations that rejected and returned consignments of Indian spices food poisoning fflo:affectsPopulation guests at mass weddings guests at mass weddings suffer food poisoning spice products fflo:hasAdulterant ethylene oxide three spice products from India contained traces of ethylene oxide monetary penalties fflo:issuedBy FSSAI FSSAI issues monetary penalties seizure and incineration of tainted food items fflo:issuedBy Food Safety and Drug Administration Food Safety and Drug Administration seized and incinerated nearly 1,700 kg of tainted food items spices adulteration finding fflo:inRegion Singapore established not only by India but also by Singapore rejection of Indian spices fflo:inRegion United States The US was the latest to do so food poisoning fflo:affectsPopulation school children school children fall sick after midday meals nausea fflo:hasEffectType fflo:AcuteEffect Minor symptoms like nausea, stomach pain, or diarrhoea stomach pain fflo:hasEffectType fflo:AcuteEffect Minor symptoms like nausea, stomach pain, or diarrhoea ethylene oxide fflo:causesEffect carcinogenicity ethylene oxide, a known carcinogen lead fflo:commonIn spices spices harboured hazardous concentrations of heavy metals such as lead mercury fflo:commonIn spices spices harboured hazardous concentrations of heavy metals such as ... mercury cadmium fflo:commonIn spices spices harboured hazardous concentrations of heavy metals such as ... cadmium Prevention of Food Adulteration Act fflo:definedIn imprisonment PFA mandated imprisonment as well food labelling norms SCHEMA_MISMATCH routinely circumvented Food labelling norms are routinely circumvented cancer fflo:hasEffectType fflo:ChronicEffect chronic diseases. You see fewer cases of cardiovascular ailments, cancerd9:T8fc,60 kg of sweets seized in food safety raids across Telangana siasat.com Hyderabad: Over 60 kg of sweets and 40 kg of bread, and other adulterated food products were seized in food safety raids at sweet manufacturing units and retailers across Telangana.
Officials inspected a total of 95 units and noted major violations, including the use of synthetic colours in milk-based sweets, the use of adulterated ghee and non-food-grade silver foils, as well as poor hygiene. They also found sweet shops reusing cooking oil, using unlabeled and expired food products.
Food safety teams collected 77 enforcement samples and 157 surveillance samples and sent them for lab analysis. Notices have been issued to violators and contaminated/colour-infused sweets discarded on site.
Advisory for festive season
The Food Safety Department of Telangana has advised consumers to purchase sweets and milk products only from licensed and hygienic outlets displaying valid FSSAI registration numbers and to avoid sweets with excessively bright or unnatural colours or those covered with non-food-grade silver foil.
Consumers are also asked to refrain from consuming products that appear stale, have an unusual odour, or are stored under unhygienic conditions and to insist on proper packaging and labelling.
In case of suspected adulteration, consumers are requested to immediately report to food safety officials through the email cfs.telangana@gmail.com or through their X page @FoodSafetyTS or reach out through the helpline number 9100105795.
Complaints can also be lodged via the FSSAI food safety connect app. ghee adulteration seizure pending_test Telangana, India milk-based sweets fflo:hasAdulterant synthetic colours use of synthetic colours in milk-based sweets synthetic colours fflo:foundAt fflo:Processing use of synthetic colours in milk-based sweets sweets fflo:hasAdulterant adulterated ghee use of adulterated ghee non-food-grade silver foils fflo:foundAt fflo:Processing non-food-grade silver foils notices to violators fflo:issuedBy Food Safety Department of Telangana Notices have been issued to violators seizure of contaminated sweets fflo:foundAtStep fflo:Retail contaminated/colour-infused sweets discarded on site colour-infused sweets fflo:hasAdulterant synthetic colours colour-infused sweetsda:T11ae,Police seize over 6,800 units of fake desi ghee, sweets across Delhi newindianexpress.com NEW DELHI: In a major crackdown against food adulteration ahead of the festive season, Delhi Police has recovered over 6,800 units of adulterated desi ghee and sweets, arresting 25 individuals in six separate raids conducted across the city this month.
According to a senior police officer, the raids were carried out based on tip-offs regarding the sale and production of adulterated food products, which tend to spike during festivals.
“These actions are crucial as they directly concern public health. The raids are aimed at preventing harmful and spurious products from reaching consumers,” the officer said.
Deputy Commissioner of Police (Crime) Aditya Gautam said that on Thursday, a raid was conducted at a factory in Raghubir Nagar where large-scale illegal production of sweets like milk cake and kalakand was underway.
These were being prepared using harmful chemicals and unhygienic ingredients. “Over 2,600 kilograms of adulterated sweets and prohibited chemicals were seized from the premises,” he said.
The factory owner, Tara Chand Aggarwal, and his 16 employees were apprehended. Preliminary investigation revealed the use of sodium formaldehyde sulfoxylate in the sweet preparation, a non-edible chemical known to cause severe health issues, including carcinogenic effects, gastrointestinal toxicity, allergic reactions, and respiratory problems.
In another operation on October 5, police raided locations in Budh Vihar and Vijay Vihar, seizing 2,651 litres of adulterated desi ghee. Two people, Rakesh Garg, a godown owner, and Mukesh, a manufacturer, were arrested. Garg was caught with 2,241 litres of adulterated ghee, while Mukesh was nabbed on October 7 with 410 litres in his possession, police said.
Deputy Commissioner of Police (Crime) Pankaj Kumar added that in three additional raids conducted at Shiv Vihar, Karawal Nagar, and Mustafabad in northeast Delhi, police busted three illegal manufacturing units and arrested six people.
A total of 1,625 kilograms of adulterated desi ghee was recovered, along with chemicals, stoves, gas cylinders, and packaging material. During questioning, the accused confessed to mixing Dalda (vanaspati ghee) and low-cost refined oil, heating them, and adding synthetic flavours and colour to mimic pure desi ghee. The final product was then packaged in counterfeit containers resembling popular brands and distributed to dairies and local vendors. Police said further probe is underway. ghee adulteration seizure arrest pending_test Mustafabad, Delhi, India, Budh Vihar, Vijay Vihar, Shiv Vihar, Karawal Nagar, Mustafabad, Delhi milk cake fflo:hasAdulterant sodium formaldehyde sulfoxylate use of sodium formaldehyde sulfoxylate in the sweet preparation kalakand fflo:hasAdulterant sodium formaldehyde sulfoxylate use of sodium formaldehyde sulfoxylate in the sweet preparation sodium formaldehyde sulfoxylate fflo:causesEffect carcinogenic effects known to cause severe health issues, including carcinogenic effects sodium formaldehyde sulfoxylate fflo:causesEffect gastrointestinal toxicity known to cause severe health issues, including ... gastrointestinal toxicity sodium formaldehyde sulfoxylate fflo:causesEffect allergic reactions known to cause severe health issues, including ... allergic reactions sodium formaldehyde sulfoxylate fflo:causesEffect respiratory problems known to cause severe health issues, including ... respiratory problems illegal production of sweets prov:wasAssociatedWith Tara Chand Aggarwal The factory owner, Tara Chand Aggarwal, and his 16 employees were apprehended Adulteration of desi ghee in Vijay Vihar prov:wasAssociatedWith Mukesh Mukesh, a manufacturer... nabbed... with 410 litres in his possession Adulteration of desi ghee in Budh Vihar prov:used desi ghee seizing 2,651 litres of adulterated desi ghee desi ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod mixing Dalda and low-cost refined oil, heating them, and adding synthetic flavours and colour mixing Dalda (vanaspati ghee) and low-cost refined oil, heating them, and adding synthetic flavours and colour Mixing Dalda and refined oil with synthetic additives fflo:hasFraudType Substitution mixing Dalda (vanaspati ghee) and low-cost refined oil Mixing Dalda and refined oil with synthetic additives fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling packaged in counterfeit containers resembling popular brands adulterated desi ghee fflo:foundAt Distribution distributed to dairies and local vendorsdb:T76b,FDA seizes adulterated ghee & oil stocks worth Rs 5.5 lakh in pre-Diwali crackdown | Kolhapur News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Kolhapur: Food and Drug Administration (FDA) officials conducted inspections at six locations across the city and district, seizing suspicious stocks of edible oil and ghee worth Rs 5.5 lakh, in a pre-Diwali crackdown. These samples have been sent to laboratories for testing, and further action will be taken based on the results.
With 
Diwali approaching, the demand for food items like ghee, edible oil, dairy products, condensed milk (khawa), jaggery, dry fruits, chocolates and other ingredients used in festive snacks has surged. This spike in demand raises concerns about possible adulteration.
FDA assistant commissioner DM Shirke said, "FDA launched a special campaign, titled âUtsav Maharashtracha, Sankalp Annasurakshitatecha' in view of the festive season. The campaign will run till Oct 25. At present, food samples from 135 shops are undergoing laboratory analysis. Appropriate action will follow once the reports are received."
The markets have seen a noticeable price hike in festive food items. Ready-made Diwali snacks (faral) have become costlier by 20-25%, while ingredients required to prepare these snacks have seen a 10% increase in grocery stores. Popular items like chivda, shankarpali, karanji, chakali and laddoo have risen by 20â30% compared to the last two years.
FDA has urged citizens to remain vigilant and purchase food products only from trusted and genuine vendors to ensure safety during the festive season. ghee edible oil adulteration seizure suspected Kolhapur, Maharashtra, India laboratory analysis fso:isPerformedOn food samples from 135 shops food samples from 135 shops are undergoing laboratory analysis laboratory analysis fso:isPerformedOn food samples food samples from 135 shops are undergoing laboratory analysisdc:Tc2a,Adulterated paneer and cooking oil seized ahead of Diwali | Agra News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Agra:Ahead of Diwali, officials have stepped up efforts to curb food adulteration. The Food Safety and Drug Administration (FSDA) carried out swift operations across districts to ensure that residents receive safe and pure festive delicacies. In the Mansoorpur area of Muzaffarnagar, the FSDA team intercepted a vehicle on the highway carrying around 15 quintals of adulterated paneer worth nearly Rs 3.3 lakh; the product, allegedly headed to Uttarakhand for sale, was seized and later destroyed by burying it in the ground using a JCB. Officials also collected four samples for laboratory testing.
Food inspector Archana Deheeran told TOI, "Paneer was being brought from Aligarh to supply Uttar Pradesh; samples have been collected, and the entire paneer that was in bad condition was also destroyed. Apart from this, we also destroyed 'khiya' (reduced dry milk). The drive is ongoing due to upcoming festivals." Mahendra Singh, the assistant commissioner of FSDA Agra, said, "During the inspection, around five shops were issued improvement notices for hygiene violations."
Chief food safety officer Atul Pathak said, "Information was received that a large quantity of oil was being illegally transported. Acting on the information, a team arrived at the scene. 
The warehouse owner is currently absconding. The warehouse has been closed, and a notice is being posted. Once the owner arrives, oil samples will be sent for testing. If found guilty, strict action will be taken."
FSDA Agra conducted inspections across several locations in the district, collecting 11 food samples and destroying over 2.2 tonnes of substandard food items. During the enforcement drive, officials seized and destroyed 1,725 kg of khoya, 500 kg of paneer and 30 kg of artificially coloured petha worth around Rs 4.48 lakh, which were being stored or transported under unhygienic conditions.
In addition, 800 kg of edible oil â including 600 kg of mustard oil and 200 kg of refined soybean oil â worth about Rs 1.3 lakh was seized from local shops. Samples were also collected from well-known establishments, and two samples of sugar toys were taken for testing. The FSDA has sent all 11 samples for laboratory analysis, and further legal action will follow under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. edible oil mustard oil refined soybean oil substandard unsafe_food seizure closure notice suspected Agra, Uttar Pradesh, India paneer fflo:hasAdulterant unknown adulterant in paneer carrying around 15 quintals of adulterated paneer adulterated paneer fflo:foundAt Distribution intercepted a vehicle on the highway carrying around 15 quintals of adulterated paneer khiya fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy destroyed 'khiya' (reduced dry milk) improvement notices for hygiene violations fflo:issuedBy FSDA around five shops were issued improvement notices for hygiene violations seizure of edible oil fflo:foundAtStep Retail seized from local shops petha fflo:hasAdulterant artificial colour 30 kg of artificially coloured pethadd:T790,Flies hovering on them, 145kg rasgullas destroyed by food safety officials in Noida indiatimes.com Noida: Food safety officials destroyed over 430kg of contaminated sweets and seized over 365kg of adulterated oil in the past two days during the inspections. 
On Saturday, a team raided a manufacturing unit in Devla, Greater Noida, where large quantities of sweets had been prepared and stored in unhygienic conditions. "The Rasgullas were kept uncovered, exposed to flies and mosquitoes, and stored in dirty containers. About 145 kg of Rasgullas were disposed of on the spot. Officials also found around 80kg of a white powder that the unit operators claimed was arrowroot, a starch used as a thickening agent. The powder was seized for testing," said assistant commissioner (food) GB Nagar, Sarvesh Mishra.
The same day, the team seized around 285kg of mustard oil from a general store in Barola, Sector 49, after it appeared adulterated and the shopkeeper failed to produce purchase bills. Additional samples of mustard oil, gram flour laddus and multi-source edible oil were also collected from other shops in Noida.
Earlier, Friday's raids in Ghodi Bachhera village of Greater Noida led to the destruction of another 285kg of Rasgullas and seizure of 35kg of white powder claimed to be Arrowroot prepared in similarly unhygienic conditions.
Mishra said, "We are carrying out continuous inspections across the district to prevent adulteration and ensure that only clean and safe food items reach the public ahead of Diwali. Strict action will be taken wherever violations are found." mustard oil adulteration seizure suspected Noida, Gautam Buddha Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, India Mustard Oil fflo:hasAdulterant Adulterant seized around 285kg of mustard oil ... after it appeared adulterated Arrowroot seizure fflo:foundAtStep Processing seizure of 35kg of white powder claimed to be Arrowroot prepared in similarly unhygienic conditionsde:T8b1,Adulterated edible oil worth Rs53L seized in Kanpur raid | Kanpur News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Kanpur: The Food Safety and Drug Administration (FSDA) carried out a major raid on Friday at M/s Gayatri Oil Industry in Fazalganj, seizing approximately 35,727 litres of edible oil worth Rs53 lakh after the Food Safety on Wheels (FSW) test found the samples suspicious.
Officials discovered that the oil containers had fresh stickers pasted over old ones. The entire stock stored in the godown was seized for further investigation. 
Assistant Commissioner (Food-II) Sanjay Pratap Singh said another FSDA team led by a food safety officer raided Satyam Sweet House in Maharajpur and destroyed 75 kilograms of substandard cheese worth Rs22,500. In a separate operation, officials raided Reouna village in Ghatampur tehsil and destroyed 240 kilograms of mawa made from substandard materials. Around 10kg vegetable fat worth Rs2,704 were also seized from the site. 
Singh said the department has launched a special campaign against adulteration and the sale of substandard food items to ensure the availability of pure and safe food for citizens. The drive is being conducted under the directions of the Food Commissioner. Various FSDA teams collected 25 food samples, including refined rice bran oil, mustard oil, mixed milk, cheese, mawa, and skimmed milk powder from different parts of the city.The department also deployed a mobile testing lab (FSW) and DOM machine to conduct on-the-spot food testing.
Food vendors were instructed to maintain hygiene, use standard ingredients, and clearly display the shelf life and "best before" dates on milk products to ensure transparency and consumer safety. edible oil adulteration substandard suspicious samples raid seizure suspected Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India mawa fflo:hasAdulterant substandard materials mawa made from substandard materials on-the-spot food testing fflo:requiresKit DOM machine deployed a mobile testing lab (FSW) and DOM machine to conduct on-the-spot food testing FSW test finding fflo:foundAtStep Storage FSW test found the samples suspicious Food Safety on Wheels test fflo:producesIndicator suspicious samples FSW test found the samples suspiciousdf:Tb40,FSDA seizes substandard supply of edible oil worth 30L | Kanpur News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Kanpur: The Food Safety and Drug Administration Department (FSDA) on Thursday seized a large consignment of edible oil of substandard quality and other food items during a citywide inspection drive.
According to officials, a total of 19,944 litres of edible oil worth Rs 30,22,468 was seized from Guru Nanak Oil Traders after the Food Safety on Wheels (FSW) mobile testing unit declared the oil sample as suspicious.
In a parallel operation, food safety officers confiscated approximately 1,500 kg of substandard cardamom seeds and âgatta' from three business establishments where the food products were being manufactured in unhygienic conditions. Another team seized 1,350 kg of adulterated pulses valued at Rs 54,000 being prepared in similar conditions.
Assistant Commissioner (Food-II) Sanjay Pratap Singh said the department has launched a special campaign against the sale of substandard and adulterated food items to ensure citizens receive pure and healthy food. The drive is being conducted under the directions of the food commissioner. 
Officers further instructed vendors to maintain hygiene and use only unadulterated, standard ingredients in food preparation. TNN edible oil substandard seizure suspected Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India Suspicious edible oil finding at Guru Nanak Oil Traders prov:wasAttributedTo Guru Nanak Oil Traders seized from Guru Nanak Oil Traders after the Food Safety on Wheels (FSW) mobile testing unit declared the oil sample as suspicious IncidentFinding: Suspicious edible oil at Guru Nanak Oil Traders fflo:foundIn edible oil a total of 19,944 litres of edible oil worth Rs 30,22,468 was seized from Guru Nanak Oil Traders after the Food Safety on Wheels (FSW) mobile testing unit declared the oil sample as suspicious IncidentFinding: Substandard cardamom seeds fflo:foundIn cardamom seeds confiscated approximately 1,500 kg of substandard cardamom seeds IncidentFinding: Suspicious edible oil at Guru Nanak Oil Traders fflo:producedBy Food Safety on Wheels (FSW) mobile testing unit Food Safety on Wheels (FSW) mobile testing unit declared the oil sample as suspicious IncidentFinding: Substandard cardamom seeds fflo:foundAtStep Processing where the food products were being manufactured IncidentFinding: Adulterated pulses fflo:foundIn pulses seized 1,350 kg of adulterated pulses IncidentFinding: Adulterated pulses fflo:foundAtStep Processing being prepared in similar conditions Seizure of substandard edible oil fflo:issuedBy Food Safety and Drug Administration Department The Food Safety and Drug Administration Department (FSDA) on Thursday seized a large consignment of edible oil RegulatoryAction: Seizure of substandard edible oil fflo:targets edible oil seized a large consignment of edible oil of substandard qualitye0:Tb98,Pre-Diwali crackdown on food adulteration in Lucknow hindustantimes.com Pre-Diwali crackdown on food adulteration in Lucknow
Suspicious food products worth ₹6.65 lakh seized, 1,552 kg items valued at ₹2.51 lakh destroyed by Food Safety and Drug Administration
LUCKNOW Ahead of Diwali and Bhai Dooj, the Food Safety and Drug Administration (FSDA) launched a major campaign to curb sale of adulterated and substandard food products, including sweets, snacks, dairy items, edible oils and other festive consumables across multiple establishments.
The department collected 31 samples from various shops, production units and storage facilities. The crackdown resulted in the seizure of 12,894 kg of suspicious food products worth approximately ₹6.65 lakh and the destruction of 1,552 kg of items valued at around ₹2.51 lakh, said VP Singh, deputy commissioner, FSDA.
Around 200 kg of toy sweets worth ₹12,000 were seized near Khurram Nagar, besides 180 kg of sweets, 450 kg of Revri, 300 kg of cardamom seeds and 720 kg of gatta, collectively worth over ₹1 lakh. Around 4 kg of adulterated talcum powder and expired packaged products were also seized.
Two consignments of dry fruits were destroyed by the FSDA at Kumar Cold Storage, Hardoi Road; these included 85 kg of dates worth ₹34,000, around 1,015 kg of dried dates (chuhara) worth ₹2.03 lakh. The department also seized 7,664 one-litre bottles of packaged drinking water worth ₹1.53 lakh from a plant in Kakori for safety violations.
Large volumes of mustard oil (over 3,200 kg) and other edible oils were seized from an outlet in Lal Kuan while around 56 litres of milk was found unsafe during roadside inspection and destroyed on the spot. Around 400 kg of substandard flour and other non-compliant food products were also destroyed, and notices were issued to the vendors concerned, said officials.
Sweets and dairy-based items like milk cake, peda, rasgulla and khoya were sampled from prominent sweet shops for lab testing. Based on the results, legal action will be taken under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. mustard oil edible oils substandard adulteration seizure suspected Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India substandard flour fflo:hasAdulterant substandard 400 kg of substandard flour Pre-Diwali crackdown on food adulteration fflo:targets sweets curb sale of adulterated and substandard food products, including sweets Pre-Diwali crackdown on food adulteration fflo:targets snacks including sweets, snacks, dairy items Pre-Diwali crackdown on food adulteration fflo:targets dairy items including sweets, snacks, dairy items Pre-Diwali crackdown on food adulteration fflo:targets edible oils including sweets, snacks, dairy items, edible oils Pre-Diwali crackdown on food adulteration fflo:targets packaged drinking water seized 7,664 one-litre bottles of packaged drinking water milk found unsafe fflo:foundAtStep Retail 56 litres of milk was found unsafe during roadside inspectione1:T6ee,FDA seizes untested soyabean oil indiatimes.com Nagpur: With 
Diwali's festive fervour around the corner, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has launched a crackdown in and around Nagpur on shops selling refined soyabean oil without the mandatory laboratory setup for testing to ensure consumer safety.
In a series of raids, FDA teams stormed outlets in Chhapru Nagar and Gondia, seizing massive stocks of untested oil that flouted food safety regulations. 
The operation, led by joint commissioner, food, KR Jaipurkar targeted vendors lacking proper laboratory setups, and Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) approvals.
In Nagpur, authorities confiscated 824 litres of suspect soyabean oil, valued at 1.24 lakh, from outlets operating without mandatory testing facilities. Meanwhile, in Gondia, a staggering 2,144 litres worth 3.23 lakh were seized by the vigilance team of FDA under joint commissioner Rahul Khade and assistant commissioner Abhay Deshpande.
These raids underscore the FDA's zero-tolerance policy toward vendors bypassing quality checks, a critical measure to prevent adulterated oils from tainting festive meals. The seized oils, sold without mandatory checks and testing, posed potential health hazards, especially during Diwali when demand for cooking oil soars. soyabean oil substandard unsafe_food seizure suspected Nagpur, Maharashtra, India Gondia, Maharashtra, India soyabean oil fflo:belongsToCategory Oils refined soyabean oil seizure of untested soyabean oil fflo:targets soyabean oil seizing massive stocks of untested oil seizure of untested soyabean oil fflo:inRegion Nagpur In Nagpur, authorities confiscated 824 litres seizure of untested soyabean oil in Gondia fflo:inRegion Gondia in Gondia, a staggering 2,144 litrese2:Te49,Fake ghee racket busted by Delhi Police ahead of Diwali, 2 arrested from Budh Vihar and Jind indianexpress.com The Delhi Police Tuesday busted a large-scale adulterated ghee manufacturing racket, seizing 2,651 litres of spurious ghee and arresting two manufacturers following raids in the capital and neighbouring Haryana.
Acting on a tip-off, a Crime Branch team carried out raids at two godowns, one in North West Delhi’s Budh Vihar and another in Jind, Haryana. The police recovered adulterated ghee packaged under labels of several popular brands. The accused have been identified as Raksesh Garg, 38, and Mukesh.
According to the police, 2,241 litres were seized from a godown owned by Garg in Budh Vihar, while another 410 litres were recovered from a unit in Jind belonging to one Mukesh. The Jind facility has been sealed, and both accused have been booked under relevant sections at the Crime Branch police station.
Investigators said the fake ghee was meant to meet the rising festive demand ahead of Diwali and other upcoming celebrations. Preliminary inquiry revealed that the accused allegedly blended low-grade vanaspati ghee and refined oil with flavouring agents, synthetic colours, and other unsafe substances to replicate the texture and aroma of pure ghee.
“The adulterated product was then filled into containers of reputed brands and sold to local distributors, dairies, and retailers at wholesale prices,” a senior police officer said.
The police added that the manufacturing cost of the spurious ghee was about Rs 200 per litre, while it was being sold to wholesalers at around Rs 350 per litre.
The Department of Food Safety assisted in the operation. Investigations revealed that Garg had allegedly been running the illegal business for nearly two years and recently scaled up production. Mukesh, meanwhile, managed the manufacturing unit and supplied the adulterated product across Haryana and the Delhi-NCR region.
The Delhi Police busted an adulterated ghee racket last week also, arresting six men, and seizing 1,625 kg of spurious stock from three illegal units. () ghee adulteration counterfeit low-grade vanaspati ghee refined oil flavouring agents synthetic colours unsafe substances raids arrests seizure facility sealed alleged Budh Vihar, Jind, North West Delhi, Jind, Delhi, Haryana, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod blending low-grade vanaspati ghee and refined oil accused allegedly blended low-grade vanaspati ghee and refined oil Delhi Police bust of adulterated ghee racket fflo:issuedBy Delhi Police The Delhi Police busted an adulterated ghee racket Ghee Adulteration Act prov:wasAssociatedWith Raksesh Garg accused have been identified as Raksesh Garg Ghee Adulteration Act prov:wasAssociatedWith Mukesh another 410 litres were recovered from a unit in Jind belonging to one Mukesh flavouring agents prov:wasGeneratedBy Ghee Adulteration Act blended low-grade vanaspati ghee and refined oil with flavouring agents unsafe substances prov:wasGeneratedBy Ghee Adulteration Act blended low-grade vanaspati ghee and refined oil with flavouring agents, synthetic colours, and other unsafe substances Blending low-grade vanaspati ghee and refined oil fflo:hasFraudType Substitution blended low-grade vanaspati ghee and refined oil with flavouring agents illegal ghee manufacturing prov:wasAssociatedWith Raksesh Garg Garg had allegedly been running the illegal business illegal ghee manufacturing prov:wasAssociatedWith Mukesh Mukesh, meanwhile, managed the manufacturing unit Department of Food Safety prov:wasAssociatedWith ghee racket bust operation The Department of Food Safety assisted in the operatione3:Tf92,Adulterated ghee seized, 2 held in outer Delhi’s Budh Vihar hindustantimes.com Adulterated ghee seized, 2 held in outer Delhi’s Budh Vihar
The accused disclosed that they used to buy low quality dalda (vanaspati ghee) and refined oil in bulk, which were heated and mixed to produce adulterated desi ghee. To give an authentic flavour, chemical-based flavoring agents like aroma, synthetic color, and unsafe substances were added.
The Delhi Police crime branch on Wednesday seized 2,651 kg of adulterated ghee of at least six popular brands after arresting two men and busting a factory in outer Delhi’s Budh Vihar. A large scale adulteration of ghee was being done ahead of Diwali.
The accused were identified as Rakesh Garg from Delhi and Mukesh from Jind in Haryana. While Garg was arrested on Sunday, Mukesh was nabbed on Tuesday, police said.
The accused disclosed that they used to buy low quality dalda (vanaspati ghee) and refined oil in bulk, which were heated and mixed to produce adulterated desi ghee. To give an authentic flavour, chemical-based flavoring agents like aroma, synthetic color, and unsafe substances were added.
The product was then packed in reputed brands cover and supplied to dairies, shops, and small distributors, especially during the festive season, said deputy commissioner of police (crime) Pankaj Kumar.
“The process not only deceived consumers but also posed a serious health risk. The accused produced adulterated ghee at the cost of ₹200 per litre and were selling it for ₹350. Further investigation is underway to identify the wider supply chain and other conspirators involved in the illegal business,” added the DCP.
Karn Pratap Singh has been writing on crime, policing, and issues of safety in Delhi for almost a decade. He covers high-intensity spot news, including terror strikes, serial blasts and security threats in the national capital.Read More ghee adulteration substitution mislabeling refined oil vanaspati ghee chemical-based flavoring agents synthetic color seizure arrest alleged Budh Vihar, outer Delhi, Delhi, India Adulteration of ghee in Budh Vihar prov:used refined oil which were heated and mixed to produce adulterated desi ghee. To give an authentic flavour, chemical-based flavoring agents like aroma, synthetic color, and unsafe substances were added. The Delhi Police crime branch on Wednesday seized 2,651 kg of adulterated ghee of at least six popular brands after arresting two men and busting a factory in outer Delhi’s Budh Vihar. A large scale adulteration of ghee was being done ahead of Diwali. The accused were identified as Rakesh Garg from Delhi and Mukesh from Jind in Haryana. While Garg was arrested on Sunday, Mukesh was nabbed on Tuesday, police said. The accused disclosed that they used to buy low quality dalda (vanaspati ghee) and refined oil in bulk, Adulteration of ghee in Budh Vihar prov:wasAssociatedWith Rakesh Garg The accused were identified as Rakesh Garg from Delhi Adulteration of ghee in Budh Vihar prov:wasAssociatedWith Mukesh Mukesh was nabbed on Tuesday, police said. Adulteration of ghee in Budh Vihar prov:used ghee produce adulterated desi ghee Adulteration of ghee in Budh Vihar prov:used dalda buy low quality dalda (vanaspati ghee) ghee fflo:hasAdulterant synthetic color synthetic color, and unsafe substances were added ghee fflo:hasAdulterant aroma chemical-based flavoring agents like aroma ghee fflo:hasAdulterant unsafe substances unsafe substances were added desi ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod heating and mixing of dalda and oil heated and mixed to produce adulterated desi ghee Heating and mixing of dalda and oil fflo:hasFraudType Substitution buy low quality dalda and refined oil in bulk, which were heated and mixed to produce adulterated desi ghee adulterated ghee fflo:foundAtStep Distribution supplied to dairies, shops, and small distributors Packing ghee in reputed brands cover fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling packed in reputed brands covere4:T966,Delhi police bust counterfeit oil and ghee manufacturing units | Delhi News - The Times of India indiatimes.com New Delhi: A racket which was manufacturing and supplying spurious ghee ahead of the festive season has been busted. A total of 2,651 litres of ghee packed under the names of reputed brands have been seized.
A raid was conducted at a godown in Budh Vihar, Rohini on Oct 5. Police seized 2,241 litres of fake ghee and arrested the godown owner, Rakesh Garg (38). Two days later, one Mukesh was caught while delivering 410 litres of adulterated ghee in Rohini. His illegal manufacturing unit in Jind, Haryana was sealed.
"The gang mixed vanaspati ghee and refined oil with chemicals and synthetic colours. It supplied the product to shops and distributors in Delhi-NCR. The adulterated ghee, which costs just around Rs 200 per litre to produce, was being sold for about Rs 350," DCP (crime) Pankaj Kumar said.
In another operation on Oct 7, the crime branch busted an illegal lubricant and mobile oil manufacturing unit in Kanjhawala. It seized 2,600 litres of spurious engine oil, packaging material and machinery worth around Rs 15 lakh. Five people, including two brothers who owned the unit, were arrested. 
They were identified as Prince (25) and his brother Sohid (22), Shakeeluddin (38), Shan Mohammad (36) and Mohammad Salman (25).
Prince, the mastermind, had been running similar illegal operations since 2019 and was arrested in 2021. "The gang used to procure raw oil, bottles and forged holograms from local suppliers. The counterfeit oil was supplied to auto shops and wholesale dealers," DCP (crime) Aditya Gautam said. ghee adulteration counterfeit vanaspati ghee refined oil chemicals synthetic colours arrest seizure sealing of unit alleged Delhi, Rohini, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vanaspati ghee The gang mixed vanaspati ghee and refined oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant refined oil The gang mixed vanaspati ghee and refined oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant chemicals mixed vanaspati ghee and refined oil with chemicals ghee fflo:hasAdulterant synthetic colours The gang mixed vanaspati ghee and refined oil with chemicals and synthetic colours ghee adulteration act in Budh Vihar prov:wasAssociatedWith Rakesh Garg arrested the godown owner, Rakesh Garg ghee adulteration act in Jind prov:wasAssociatedWith Mukesh one Mukesh was caught while delivering 410 litres of adulterated gheee5:Tcc0,Festive season taste spoled: Repeat offenders held in Ludhianaâ_x0080__x0099_s ghee sting. | Ludhiana News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Ludhiana: Food safety authorities in this city have seized about 50 kg of alleged adulterated desi ghee and raw materials following a major raid on a house operating as an illicit production unit.
The raid, conducted on Monday in the city's Sham Nagar area, also netted cream and milk powder believed to be used in the production of the substandard ghee, the food safety department confirmed. The operation was initiated based on a confidential tip. One woman connected to the case was taken into custody with the support of the Bus Stand police post team. "All the material was immediately confiscated, and a detailed investigation into the matter has been initiated," the department said in a statement issued here.
Repeated Violations
Preliminary inquiries revealed that the individuals involved in the illegal production are repeat offenders who have faced legal action under the Food Safety and Standards Act in 2017 and 2020 for similar activities. In a further sign of the persistent nature of the illegal operation, the suspects were declared absconders by the court in 2023, the department noted. "This shows clearly that these persons had been endangering public health repeatedly," the department added.
Samples Sent to Lab
The Food Safety team collected samples of the ghee, cream, and milk powder from the site. These have been sent to a laboratory for testing. Food Safety Officers Yogesh Goyal, Divyajot Kaur, and Harsimran Kaur successfully conducted the operation in coordination with the local police. "Once the reports are received, strict legal action will be taken against the individuals under the Food Safety and Standards Act," the department stated. 
Zero-Tolerance Policy
Ludhiana civil surgeon, Dr Ramandeep Kaur, emphasised the serious public health threat posed by consuming food products made with adulterated ingredients, particularly during the ongoing festive season. She warned that the use of low-quality materials not only endangers public health but also places a significant strain on the healthcare system. She affirmed that the food safety department and police had adopted a "zero-tolerance policy" against this kind of illegal activities.
Dr Ramandeep Kaur appealed to the public to exercise caution, advising them to only purchase sweets, ghee, and other food items from licensed shops. She urged consumers to "check the quality, standards, and packaging carefully before purchasing". The civil surgeon also encouraged immediate reporting of any suspicious food items to the food safety department. ghee adulteration substandard adulterated ingredients raid seizure custody alleged Ludhiana, Punjab, India adulterated ingredients fflo:causesEffect public health threat serious public health threat posed by consuming food products made with adulterated ingredients illicit production unit prov:wasAssociatedWith individuals involved in the illegal production individuals involved in the illegal production are repeat offenders individuals involved in the illegal production fflo:causesEffect endangering public health these persons had been endangering public health repeatedlye6:T658,Food safety department seizes adulterated paneer in Haridwar | Dehradun News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Haridwar:The food safety department on Tuesday seized 1.5 quintals of adulterated paneer being transported from Saharanpur in Haridwar's Bhagwanpur. The paneer was and was meant to be supplied in Haridwar and Dehradun. After taking samples, officials destroyed the entire stock. . Adulterated dairy products were also seized in 
Rishikesh on Tuesday.
Assistant commissioner of the food safety department, M N Joshi, told TOI, "Our team conducted a raid on the border area in Bhagwanpur Tuesday morning. We stopped a passenger vehicle and found cheese hidden inside the back seat. We collected samples and destroyed them." In Rishikesh, adulterated dairy products, including skimmed milk, cream, and ghee, were seized, and samples were sent to the lab." ghee adulteration unspecified seizure sample collection suspected Rishikesh, Uttarakhand, India skimmed milk fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy adulterated dairy products, including skimmed milk cream fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy adulterated dairy products, including skimmed milk, cream, and ghee ghee fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy adulterated dairy products, including skimmed milk, cream, and ghee paneer fflo:hasAdulterant unspecified adulterant seized 1.5 quintals of adulterated paneer Seizure of adulterated paneer in Haridwar fflo:foundAtStep Distribution paneer being transported from Saharanpur skimmed milk fflo:hasAdulterant unspecified adulterant adulterated dairy products, including skimmed milk paneer fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy adulterated paneere7:T1130,Ludhiana: 50-kg adulterated ghee seized hindustantimes.com Ludhiana: 50-kg adulterated ghee seized
Preliminary inquiry revealed that the individuals involved had previously been engaged in similar illegal activities of preparing adulterated food products, say health officials
Intensifying its crackdown on adulterated food ahead of the festive season, the district health department on Monday seized around 50 kg of adulterated desi ghee during a raid in the Sham Nagar area.
The raid, carried out by the food safety team following a tip-off, uncovered a small-scale operation in a house where cream and milk powder were being used to manufacture poor-quality ghee. The team confiscated the adulterated material and initiated a detailed investigation.
Preliminary inquiry revealed that the individuals involved had previously been engaged in similar illegal activities of preparing adulterated food products. Action had already been taken against them under the Food Safety and Standards Act in 2017 and 2020. Furthermore, in 2023, a court had declared them absconders.
During the raid, with the support of the bus stand police post team, one woman connected to the case was taken into custody. The food safety team collected samples of ghee, cream and milk powder from the spot, which have been sent to the laboratory for testing. Once the reports are received, strict action will be taken against the individuals under the Food Safety and Standards Act, officials said.
Civil Surgeon Dr Ramandeep Kaur stated that during the festive season, the consumption of food items prepared using adulterated ghee, cream and other low-quality materials poses a serious threat to people’s health. She emphasised that such illegal activities not only endanger public life but also put a huge burden on the healthcare system. She further added that the food safety department and the police have adopted a zero-tolerance policy against such illegal activities.
Dr Ramandeep Kaur appealed to the public to always purchase sweets, ghee, and other food items only from licensed shops during the festive season. She advised people to carefully check the quality, standards and packaging before purchasing. If anyone comes across suspicious food items, they should immediately report the matter to the food safety officials, she added.
The raid comes a day after officials seized 189 kg of adulterated paneer being supplied to fast-food joints across Ludhiana.
Prepare sweets at home: Expert
As many as 40 farm women members of the PAU Kisan Club were provided hand-holding in making nutritious home-made recipes during the monthly training camp, held under the guidance of MS Bhullar, director of extension education. Arshdeep Singh, a food science and technology expert, said, “Rather than purchasing adulterated sweets, people should prepare these at home using fresh ingredients.” Experts Dr Sonika Sharma and Dr Shikha Mahajan explained the preparation of healthy recipes at home – coconut ladoos and rolls, as well as dry fruit roll. ghee adulteration seizure pending_test India, Sham Nagar area, Ludhiana desi ghee fflo:hasAdulterant cream cream and milk powder were being used to manufacture poor-quality ghee desi ghee fflo:hasAdulterant milk powder cream and milk powder were being used to manufacture poor-quality ghee desi ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod manufacturing poor-quality ghee using cream and milk powder cream and milk powder were being used to manufacture poor-quality ghee manufacturing poor-quality ghee using cream and milk powder fflo:hasFraudType Substitution cream and milk powder were being used to manufacture poor-quality ghee manufacturing poor-quality ghee using cream and milk powder fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional individuals involved had previously been engaged in similar illegal activities desi ghee fflo:foundAt Processing uncovered a small-scale operation in a house where cream and milk powder were being used to manufacture Adulterated desi ghee seizure fflo:inRegion Ludhiana seized around 50 kg of adulterated desi ghee during a raid in the Sham Nagar area desi ghee fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy adulterated desi ghee Seizure of 189 kg adulterated paneer fflo:foundAtStep Distribution seized 189 kg of adulterated paneer being supplied to fast-food joints adulterated paneer fflo:foundIn fast-food joints adulterated paneer being supplied to fast-food jointse8:Te7b,Ahead of Diwali, 10,000kg of spurious ghee seized | Surat News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Surat: Ahead of 
Diwali, city police dismantled a large-scale operation producing and distributing counterfeit ghee, arresting four people and seizing nearly 9,919kg of fake ghee, worth Rs 53 lakh. 
The total estimated value of the seized products and equipment is Rs 1.20 crore, officials said.
The accused â Jayesh Maisuriya (38), Ankit Panchiwala (36), Sumit Maisuriya (35) and Dinesh Gehlot (32) â allegedly operated three units in the Amroli area, producing the spurious ghee using vegetable oil and chemicals to mimic the texture, colour and fragrance of pure ghee. 
These counterfeit products were sold at grocery stores in slum areas at prices far below those of genuine goods, with manufacturers selling them for under Rs 500 a kg and retailers charging around Rs 675 a kg.
The raids targeted multiple locations, including Madhav Dairy Product in Sardar Nagar and its warehouse at Pramukh Heights, Kosad; New Aadinath Dairy Product at Pragai Eco Park, Bharthana with a warehouse at Vedant Texo, Kosad; and a third unit at Eva Embro Park, Kosad, along with an adjacent warehouse.
The operation was led by police inspector A S Sonara under the supervision of deputy commissioner of police Rajdeepsinh Nakum.
Investigations revealed that the accused had been running the racket for two years, supplying counterfeit ghee to local stores.
In Aug, Gujarat's Food and Drugs Control Administration (FDCA) seized over 12 tonnes of suspect ghee, worth Rs 81 lakh, during raids across multiple districts in Aug. The drive was initiated against dairies suspected of using cheaper palm oil and vegetable fats to adulterate ghee. Samples from several major facilities were found to be substandard. 
The largest seizure was made in Surat with 10 tonnes of ghee worth Rs 65 lakh seized after three samples failed quality tests. At another dairy, 11 tonnes of ghee, valued at Rs 10 lakh, were destroyed after all samples were found to be substandard. Another batch of 448kg of ghee worth Rs 2.75 lakh was also found to be substandard. ghee adulteration counterfeit vegetable oil chemicals palm oil vegetable fats seizure arrest destruction alleged Surat, Gujarat, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable oil producing the spurious ghee using vegetable oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant chemicals producing the spurious ghee using vegetable oil and chemicals ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil using cheaper palm oil and vegetable fats to adulterate ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable fats using cheaper palm oil and vegetable fats to adulterate ghee Counterfeit Ghee Production in Surat prov:wasAssociatedWith Jayesh Maisuriya The accused â Jayesh Maisuriya (38)... allegedly operated three units... producing the spurious ghee Counterfeit Ghee Production in Surat prov:used ghee producing the spurious ghee using vegetable oil and chemicals Counterfeit Ghee Production in Surat prov:used ghee producing the spurious ghee using vegetable oil and chemicals Counterfeit Ghee Production in Surat fflo:foundAt Amroli area operated three units in the Amroli area ghee seizure operation fflo:issuedBy Gujarat's Food and Drugs Control Administration Gujarat's Food and Drugs Control Administration (FDCA) seized over 12 tonnes of suspect ghee using cheaper palm oil and vegetable fats to adulterate ghee fflo:hasFraudType Substitution using cheaper palm oil and vegetable fats to adulterate ghee Substandard ghee finding fflo:foundAtStep Processing Samples from several major facilities were found to be substandard Ghee substandard finding fflo:inRegion Gujarat Gujarat's Food and Drugs Control Administration (FDCA) seizede9:T9fc,Delhi police bust three illegal manufacturing units of adulterated ghee; six held newindianexpress.com NEW DELHI: In a major crackdown ahead of the festive season, the Delhi Police has busted three illegal manufacturing units of adulterated desi ghee operating in northeast Delhi and arrested six people.
Acting on a tip-off, police conducted raids at Shiv Vihar, Karawal Nagar, and Mustafabad and seized 1,625 kg of adulterated desi ghee.
A total of 1,625 kg of adulterated desi ghee, chemicals and medicines used in adulteration, and gas cylinders, stoves, and manufacturing equipment were recovered during the raids.
The accused have been identified as Safiq (30), Yusuf Malik (50), Mehboob (22), Shakir, Sharukh, and Zamaluddin (40).
During interrogation, the accused disclosed that they purchased Dalda (vanaspati ghee) and cheap refined oil in bulk, which were heated and mixed to imitate pure desi ghee. To mimic authentic flavour, chemical-based flavouring agents, synthetic color, and unsafe substances were added, Deputy Commissioner of Police (crime) Vikram Singh said.
The product was then packed in tins and packets resembling genuine brands and supplied to dairies, shops, and distributors, especially during the festive season. This crude and hazardous process not only deceived consumers but posed a serious health risk, police added.
Accused disclosed that the production cost of adulterated desi ghee is approximately Rs 1300-1400, and they were selling it in Rs 3500-4000 per tin in the market, the DCP added. ghee adulteration seizure recall_triggered Delhi, India Adulteration of desi ghee in Delhi prov:wasAssociatedWith Yusuf Malik The accused have been identified as Safiq (30), Yusuf Malik (50) Adulteration of desi ghee in Delhi prov:wasAssociatedWith Mehboob The accused have been identified as Safiq (30), Yusuf Malik (50), Mehboob (22) Adulteration of desi ghee in Delhi prov:wasAssociatedWith Shakir The accused have been identified as Safiq (30), Yusuf Malik (50), Mehboob (22), Shakir, Sharukh, and Zamaluddin (40). Adulteration of desi ghee in Delhi prov:wasAssociatedWith Sharukh The accused have been identified as Safiq (30), Yusuf Malik (50), Mehboob (22), Shakir, Sharukh, and Zamaluddin (40). Adulteration of desi ghee in Delhi prov:used desi ghee illegal manufacturing units of adulterated desi ghee Adulteration of desi ghee in Delhi prov:used Dalda purchased Dalda (vanaspati ghee) and cheap refined oil in bulk Adulteration of desi ghee in Delhi prov:used refined oil purchased Dalda and cheap refined oil in bulkea:T593,Raids at 8 shops in Gurgaon, 16 food samples seized, sent for tests indiatimes.com Gurgaon: Amid ongoing Navratri celebrations, the food safety department conducted raids at eight shops, seizing 16 food samples due to safety concerns related to fasting items such as kuttu atta, singhara atta, sabudana, samak, mustard oil, jaggery and buura.
The crackdown targeted adulteration-prone goods in high demand during the festival, with samples now sent to a Karnal lab for testing. A major violation was found at Swami Agencies in Shelta Colony, operating without an FSSAI licence—prompting seizure of multiple samples. Another shop was caught selling unpackaged and unlabelled food items. Officials warned of legal action if adulteration is confirmed, citing past food poisoning incidents and urging consumers to choose sealed, branded products and report any suspicious vendors. Dr Ramesh Chauhan, a food department official, stated that the department would take strict action if any of the samples are found to be substandard or adulterated.
This inspection comes in the wake of a food safety scare earlier in March 2024, when ten people from Sector 14 fell ill after consuming fritters made with adulterated kuttu flour. mustard oil adulteration substandard raids seizure suspected Gurgaon, Haryana, India Raids at 8 shops in Gurgaon fflo:issuedBy food safety department food safety department conducted raids at eight shopseb:Tca4,14 students of a government school in Hazaribag take ill after consuming snacks , hospitalized indiatimes.com Hazaribag: Fourteen students of Kasturba Gandhi Balika Uchch Vidyalaya fell ill after allegedly consuming contaminated roasted flattened rice during evening snacks on Tuesday. All of them were admitted to the Barhi subdivisional hospital after they complained of stomach-ache. Doctors at the hospital on Wednesday said the condition of the students was now stable.
The school is in Barsot village under Barhi block of the district and has over 400 students. The students alleged that they were served flattened rice with almonds. Some of them had spotted insects in their snacks.
Barhi subdivisional officer Johan Tudu visited the hospital and inquired about the quality of the food being served at the hostel while Barhi MLA Manoj Kumar Yadav spoke to Hazaribag deputy commissioner Shashi Prakash Singh and demanded action against the concerned persons. Tudu assured that a probe will be initiated into the incident.
School chairperson Malti Devi met the students at the hospital and accused hostel warden Roshni Bara of mismanagement. “Ration is often shown as unavailable and meals are irregular,” she claimed. Parents present at the hospital sought the warden removal. When contacted, Bara said the flattened rice which was served to the students were served by a vendor.
While Barsot mukhiya Motilal Choudhary alleged that school management committee meetings were not being held regularly, Ramesh Thakur, district vice-president of BJP, demanded a high-level probe into the incident.
On Wednesday, officials from the district food safety department inspected the school premises. Led by Dr Shashi Jaiswal, assistant officer and additional chief medical officer, examined the school kitchen, storeroom, and dining areas. Samples of mustard oil, rice, flour, and toasted flattened rice consumed by students were collected and sent to the state food testing laboratory in Ranchi for analysis. The team directed the warden to maintain hygiene in kitchen and dining areas, install nets on windows, and ensure the use of adulteration-free food items. In addition, cooks were directed to wear masks, caps, and aprons while preparing meals. “If any food items are found to be substandard or contaminated, action will be taken under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006,” the officials said. mustard oil contamination substandard inspection sample_collection pending_test Hazaribag, Jharkhand, India roasted flattened rice fflo:hasAdulterant insects Some of them had spotted insects in their snacks. roasted flattened rice fflo:hasIngredient almonds served flattened rice with almonds mustard oil sample fflo:collectedAt school kitchen Samples of mustard oil... were collected rice sample fflo:collectedAt school kitchen Samples of mustard oil, rice, flour, and toasted flattened rice consumed by students were collected flour sample fflo:collectedAt school kitchen Samples of mustard oil, rice, flour, and toasted flattened rice consumed by students were collected analysis of collected samples fso:isPerformedAt state food testing laboratory in Ranchi sent to the state food testing laboratory in Ranchi for analysisec:T8b0,Spurious ghee seized, stale paneer destroyed | Jaipur News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Jaipur: Health department's food safety officers seized 884 litre of spurious ghee labelled as Saras, Krishna, Lotus and Goras brands in the city Tuesday. They also seized a pick-up truck transporting paneer and destroyed about 400kg of stale paneer. 
Chief medical health officer (Jaipur-I) Ravi Shekhawat said a food safety team conducted an inspection in Chandpole Bazaar. Upon inspecting the firm, suspicions arose regarding the packaging. Representatives of the brands Saras, Lotus, Krishna and Goras were called to the site where they confirmed that the ghee products were fake. 
The team collected six samples of ghee from the site and seized 884 litre of ghee on suspicion of adulteration. It was found that this ghee was being distributed in places like Nawa, Kuchaman, Parbatsar, Makrana and other places. 
He said once the lab reports of the samples are received, strict action will be taken according to the Food Safety and Standards Act 2006 and its regulations of 2011. The team included food safety officers Virendra Singh, Pawan Gupta and Vishal Mittal. Arun Kumar Jain, the owner of Agarwal Road Lines, said that he was unaware of the source or the intended recipients of the goods. 
It was also found that the firm did not possess a food licence. 
In another inspection, a food safety team reached Balaji Mod in Malviya Nagar and seized a pick-up truck transporting paneer and destroyed about 400kg of stale paneer. The truck was bringing paneer from Deeg which was being sold in Jaipur at only Rs 240 per kilogram. The team collected a sample of this paneer and sent it to the food testing lab, while the remaining paneer, due to its foul smell, was destroyed on the spot at an appropriate location. ghee adulteration counterfeit spurious ghee seizure alleged Jaipur, Rajasthan, India spurious ghee fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee spurious ghee labelled as Saras, Krishna, Lotus and Goras brands spurious ghee fflo:foundAt Distribution ghee was being distributed in places like Nawa, Kuchaman paneer fflo:foundAt Deeg bringing paneer from Deeg stale paneer detection fflo:producedBy SensoryTest due to its foul smelled:T5f0,Ranchi District Boosts Food Safety Measures Ahead of Durga Puja with Raids on Sweet Shops | Ranchi News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Ranchi: With Durga Puja around the corner, the Ranchi district administration has intensified food safety drives across the city to curb adulteration and ensure hygienic practices in sweet shops and food units. Over the last two days, raids were carried out in more than 20 establishments, leading to seizures and on-the-spot testing. On Tuesday, a joint team of the food safety department and Sukhdev Nagar police raided a food establishment at Madhukam, found to be operating without a valid FSSAI license. Officials seized 42 kg of suspected adulterated ghee and vanaspati from the premises, sealed samples for laboratory testing, and ordered the unit to be shut down until further notice. The campaign continued on Wednesday at Albert Ekka Chowk, Main Road, and the MG Road stretch, where a mobile food safety lab was deployed for on-spot testing. Officials inspected over 15 shops. Officials seized 42 kg of suspected adulterated ghee and vanaspati from the premises, sealed samples for laboratory testing, and ordered the unit to be shut down until further notice. ghee vanaspati adulteration unsafe_food seizure shut down suspected Ranchi, Jharkhand, India laboratory testing fso:isPerformedOn sealed samples sealed samples for laboratory testing order to shut down the unit fflo:issuedBy Ranchi district administration ordered the unit to be shut down until further noticeee:T53e,Food safety department seizes 42 kg of adulterated ghee in Ranchi ahead of Durga Puja | Ranchi News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Ranchi: The state food safety department seized 42 kg of suspected adulterated ghee during a raid conducted on Tuesday, ahead of the upcoming 
Durga Puja festivities. Ranchi district food safety officer (FSO) Dr Pawan inspected a suspected adulterated ghee manufacturer, following the seizure.
âDuring the inspection, it was found that the manufacturer was operating without a valid FSSAI license certificate. A sample of ghee was taken from the spot for laboratory testing, and 42 kg of suspected adulterated ghee was seized,â the FSO added. 
The FSO appealed to consumers to be cautious of adulterated food items during the festivals and to inform the department immediately in case of any complaint. ghee adulteration unsafe_food seizure of 42 kg of suspected adulterated ghee suspected Ranchi, Jharkhand, India seizure of 42 kg of suspected adulterated ghee fflo:issuedBy state food safety department state food safety department seized 42 kg of suspected adulterated ghee laboratory testing fso:isPerformedOn sample of ghee A sample of ghee was taken from the spot for laboratory testing seizure of suspected adulterated ghee fflo:inRegion Ranchi seized 42 kg of suspected adulterated ghee in Ranchief:T97b,FDCA seizes 5.5 tonnes of ‘adulterated ghee’ worth Rs 35 lakh in Banaskantha indianexpress.com The Gujarat Food and Drugs Control Administration (FDCA) on Saturday said it had seized 5.5 tonnes of suspected adulterated ghee, worth Rs 35 lakh, from a Banaskantha-based unit, identified as Shree Sales, on September 5.
A statement from FDCA Commissioner H G Koshia said that the agency had been keeping a close watch on Shree Sales located in Chandisar GIDC in Banaskantha after a previous seizure of over 650 kg of suspected adulterated ghee worth more than Rs 3.5 lakh in June this year.
On September 5, FDCA officials again visited the premises, inspected the godown and recovered 124 tins of 15 kg of “Gumar Brand” ghee and 232 tins of 15 kg pack of unlabeled ghee in suspicious condition. Based on strong suspicion of adulteration, two ghee samples were taken for testing and the remaining quantity of about 5.5 tons was seized, the estimated value of which is more than Rs 35 lakh, said the FDCA. An inspection of the manufacturing area revealed that no quantity of ghee or any other raw materials was found from the spot. Additionally, empty boxes of palm oil were found at the manufacturing site, said the FDCA. Therefore, based on the strong suspicion that the said ghee was adulterated with palm oil, action was taken by the FDCA.
A total of 46 tonnes or 46,000 kg of suspicious food items worth Rs1.8 crore have been seized from 10 places across the state in August by the Gujarat FDCA. At least 28 samples of food items have been sent to the lab for testing, said the officials. ghee adulteration palm oil seizure suspected Banaskantha, Gujarat, India seizure of 5.5 tonnes of suspected adulterated ghee fflo:issuedBy Gujarat Food and Drugs Control Administration The Gujarat Food and Drugs Control Administration (FDCA) on Saturday said it had seized 5.5 tonnes of suspected adulterated ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil ghee was adulterated with palm oil ghee adulteration act at Shree Sales prov:used ghee seized 5.5 tonnes of suspected adulterated ghee suspected adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt Shree Sales seized 5.5 tonnes of suspected adulterated ghee... from a Banaskantha-based unit, identified as Shree Sales seizure of suspicious food items fflo:issuedBy FDCA action was taken by the FDCA 28 samples of food items fflo:collectedAt 10 places across the state seized from 10 places across the statef0:Tcb8,Onam vigil: five special squads in action to expose low-quality food products thehindu.com Strengthening its fight against adulteration and unhygienic practices, the Food Safety department has deployed five special squads with mobile lab testing facilities for aggressive checking during the Onam season in Kozhikode.
Within a week after the special drive was launched, the squads inspected 385 shops — including wayside eateries, hotels, bakeries, and restaurants — to expose erring food business units.
“We have already sent 180 samples for detailed lab inspection. As many as 48 persons were served notices,” said a senior officer. He added that nine shops had already been issued closure notices for not complying with food safety licensing norms.
Considering the high price of coconut oil and the increasing demand in view of the Onam season, the special squads have been asked to keep an eye on the purity of packaged products available in the market. Sample collection has been continuing for more than three months as part of the market vigil. Food safety department officials said they had so far collected over 170 samples for lab tests.
“The quality of three coconut oil brands has been found poor and the samples have been sent for further lab inspections at Central Food Lab. Action will be initiated soon against Tripthi coconut oil marketed by Renuka oil Mills and two other types of Bhadras Kerapriyam coconut oil,” said a Food Safety department officer who is now coordinating the inspections. He added more samples would be collected from all suspected spots.
Food Safety Assistant Commissioner A. Sakeer Hussain pointed out that the marketing of testa oil extracted from the brown outer layer of a coconut was being promoted and branded as real coconut oil, which would have to be examined closely by the buyers. He said the customers should closely checked the labels on the packages and ensure purity.
Food Safety squads also made it clear that the raw sale of unpacked coconut oil from the unregistered entrepreneurs would be taken up as an offence. Either they have to immediately stop the trade or secure permission from the police to ensure a lawful affair with accountability, they said.
Published - September 03, 2025 06:43 pm IST coconut oil adulteration substitution mislabeling testa oil Action will be initiated soon suspected Kozhikode, Kerala, India detailed lab inspection fso:isPerformedOn 180 samples sent 180 samples for detailed lab inspection coconut oil fflo:hasAdulterant testa oil marketing of testa oil extracted from the brown outer layer of a coconut was being promoted and branded as real coconut oil testa oil fflo:isSubstituteFor coconut oil testa oil extracted from the brown outer layer of a coconut was being promoted and branded as real coconut oil closure notices fflo:issuedBy Food Safety department issued closure notices for not complying with food safety licensing norms Tripthi coconut oil fflo:hasAdulterant testa oil marketing of testa oil extracted from the brown outer layer of a coconut was being promoted and branded as real coconut oil lab inspection of coconut oil samples fso:isPerformedAt Central Food Lab samples have been sent for further lab inspections at Central Food Labf1:T91d,'Bhandara' Turns Nightmare! 250 Villagers Fall Ill After Eating Halwa Made with Adulterated Ghee in MP's Shivpuri freepressjournal.in Shivpuri (Madhya Pradesh): A religious feast in Madhya Pradesh's Shivpuri turned into a nighmare for the devotees after 250 people fell seriously ill after taking the meal. It is said that the Halwa was prepared in adulterated ghee.
According to reports, the incident unfolded in Mohrai village of Kolaras tehsil of the district, where villagers began complaining of vomiting and diarrhea just 30 mins after having the dessert on Saturday.
Acting promptly upon receiving the information, the health department and SDM Kolaras Anup Shrivastava reached the spot. So far, 175 patients have been treated, while two have been admitted to Kolaras Hospital. Meanwhile, some patients have been referred to the district hospital.
According to officials all the people are out of danger and none of the cases are critical. While, the samples of the of halwa and ghee were collected for testing.
Preliminary investigation by the food department revealed that the ghee was not edible it was meant only for worship purposes.
According to the village Sarpanch, Shikhar Dhakad the ghee was bought from a local shop to prepare the halwa for feast. District Medical and Health Officer Dr. Sanjay Risheshwar informed that several teams of doctors are camping in the village and providing treatment overnight. ghee halwa adulteration substitution adulterated ghee sample collection medical treatment alleged Shivpuri, Madhya Pradesh, India halwa fflo:hasAdulterant adulterated ghee Halwa was prepared in adulterated ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant adulterated ghee Halwa was prepared in adulterated ghee halwa fflo:hasIngredient ghee Halwa was prepared in adulterated ghee adulterated ghee fflo:causesEffect vomiting villagers began complaining of vomiting vomiting fflo:hasEffectType fflo:AcuteEffect complaining of vomiting and diarrhea just 30 mins after diarrhea fflo:hasEffectType fflo:AcuteEffect complaining of vomiting and diarrhea just 30 mins after Halwa poisoning incident fflo:inRegion Shivpuri incident unfolded in Mohrai village of Kolaras tehsil of the district adulterated ghee fflo:hasDefinition not edible it was meant only for worship purposes ghee was not edible it was meant only for worship purposesf2:Tcb2,FDCA crackdown: 12 tonnes of adulterated ghee worth Rs 81 lakh seized in Gujarat | Ahmedabad News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Ahmedabad: Gujarat's Food and Drugs Control Administration (FDCA) intensified its campaign against ghee adulteration, seizing over 12 tonnes of suspect ghee worth Rs 81 lakh during raids across multiple districts in Aug.
The crackdown targeted dairy operations suspected of using cheaper palm oil and vegetable fats to adulterate ghee products. FDCA commissioner H G Koshia said that the samples from several major facilities turned out to be of substandard quality, prompting immediate legal action.
A press release from the department stated that a dairy farm in Surat faced the largest seizure, with 10 tonnes of ghee worth Rs 65 lakh confiscated after three samples failed quality tests. At another dairy, nearly 11 tons of ghee, valued at Rs 10 lakh, were destroyed after all samples were found to be substandard. Another batch of 448kg of ghee worth Rs 2.75 lakh was also found to be substandard. Similarly, in Banaskantha district, authorities seized 824kg of suspicious ghee valued at Rs 5.6 lakh.
Raids revealed the modus operandi behind ghee adulteration. While one of the companies had to destroy 5 tonnes of palm oil worth Rs 7.48 lakh, which was specifically earmarked for ghee adulteration, another faced confiscation of 11 tons of RBD palm oil valued at Rs 16 lakh. 
Additional seizures included 2.7 tonnes of palm oil and vanaspati and 208kg of vegetable fat.
The department's comprehensive approach extended beyond ghee as it collected 28 samples across operations and confiscated adulterated products worth Rs 1.8 crore. During Shravan, special surveillance of fasting foods yielded 774 samples from 468 businesses.
Koshia told TOI that similar enforcement drives will be on during the festival months to ensure that consumers don't face health risks associated with adulterated ghee. "It is meant to send a clear warning to producers who compromise on food integrity for profit," says Koshia. ghee adulteration seizure pending_test Gujarat, India India, Banaskantha Ghee fflo:hasAdulterant Palm oil using cheaper palm oil and vegetable fats to adulterate ghee Ghee fflo:hasAdulterant Vegetable fats using cheaper palm oil and vegetable fats to adulterate ghee Ghee fflo:hasAdulterant Palm oil using cheaper palm oil and vegetable fats to adulterate ghee Seizure of 824kg suspicious ghee in Banaskantha fflo:inRegion Banaskantha in Banaskantha district, authorities seized 824kg of suspicious ghee Ghee substandard finding fflo:foundAtStep Processing At another dairy, nearly 11 tons of ghee Ghee seizure in Banaskantha fflo:foundAtStep Processing in Banaskantha district, authorities seized 824kg of suspicious ghee Ghee seizure in Gujarat fflo:inRegion Gujarat seized in Gujarat Substandard ghee finding in Surat fflo:inRegion Surat dairy farm in Surat faced the largest seizure ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil palm oil ... specifically earmarked for ghee adulteration ghee fflo:hasAdulterant RBD palm oil confiscation of 11 tons of RBD palm oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vanaspati seizures included 2.7 tonnes of palm oil and vanaspati ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable fat 208kg of vegetable fatf3:T2d03,A spoonful of policy change: Why a lower tax slab for ghee under GST 2.0 is good for hearts, homes, and farmers indiatimes.com India needs to recognise a simple yet crucial truth about its diets, asserts Dr Sachin Shah, Director of Neonatal and Paediatric Intensive Care Services at Surya Hospitals in Pune. “Ghee is a healthier staple compared to refined oils and butter. According to research published in the Journal of Food Science and Technology— the official publication of the Association of Food Scientists and Technologists of India—improves nutrient absorption, strengthens the immune system, and contains essential vitamins A, D, E, and K. It helps with energy production, digestion, and brain development in kids. Ghee, when used moderately, can be an ally in the fight against lifestyle diseases by providing protection,” Shah says. He adds that traditional Indian diets recognised this wisdom centuries ago, but in the rush toward so-called ‘modern’ cooking oils, we lost touch with the benefits of ghee.
“Unlike refined seed oils linked to inflammation and heart risks, ghee provides nutrients the body can absorb and use effectively,” says Shahida Chaudhary, a former senior dietitian at Moolchand Hospital, echoing this view. “For the average household, a spoon of ghee can improve satiety, boost immunity—and even aid heart health when taken in moderation.”
It is this very nutritional value of ghee, experts argue, that makes its affordability a matter of public health concern. In recent times, ghee prices have gone up due to an increase in milk prices and growing demand, apart from the high GST. Experts contend that if healthier fats like ghee are kept out of reach because of high taxes, people will continue to fall back on cheaper, less safe oils.
Industry observers suggest that making ghee more affordable could involve reducing its GST burden, as consuming ghee is not a luxury but rather a matter of preventive health. “If millions of families are priced out of healthier options, they will turn to harmful substitutes,” says Chaudhary. “Lowering GST on ghee is a health investment for the country, not just a tax tweak.”
India’s dairy sector supports over 80 million smallholder households, and more affordable ghee would “directly improve nutrition, raise real incomes, and reduce informal trade,” Gopal observes. Currently, only about 15% of the ghee market is formal, leaving the rest vulnerable to adulteration and tax evasion, he informs. “A 5% GST is not just a tax adjustment; it is a timely correction that benefits farmers, consumers, and public health alike,” he argues.
Notably, supporters of this idea contend that a 5% GST would boost affordability, reduce counterfeits, encourage innovation, and increase rural incomes—without denting revenue, as higher formal consumption could expand the tax base. Ravin Saluja, Director of Sterling Agro Industries, the parent company of Nova Dairy, believes that the GST cut could lift sales by 20-25% and raise farmer incomes by Rs 2-2.5 per litre. Similarly, Sandeep Aggarwal, Director of SMC Foods, projects a revenue increase of at least 25% along with better plant utilisation.
Additionally, R.S. Sodhi, Chairman of the India Dairy Association, cautions about the increasing issue of adulteration. He says that aligning ghee and butter with lower-taxed essentials will improve compliance, curb unsafe substitutes, and unlock growth in a sector vital to both farmer prosperity and national nutritional security.
Following PM Modi’s announcement, the GST Council is set to meet on September 3 and 4 to decide on reducing tax levies on various goods and services. Sources indicate that the 5% slab is being considered for all food and textile products.
A tale of two tax slabs, counterfeits & public health risks
For mid-sized processors, the rate gap is punishing, believe dairy players. Saluja says the 12% GST directly impacts 85% of his ghee and butter portfolio, raising consumer prices by 8-10% and cutting margins by 3-5%. “The disparity has shifted 15-20% of our rural consumers to cheaper edible oils, and we’ve seen a 200% surge in counterfeit ghee,” he notes.
The 12% GST inflates ghee prices by around 7%, says Aggarwal. The high GST is also cited as a factor that stifles innovation in this critical sector. Saluja believes that it “restricts R&D for fortified products or eco-friendly packaging.” Lowering GST could also free up cash flows for supply chain improvements for dairy players, notes Aggarwal.
The high GST has also bolstered the informal market, industry observers say. “GST had streamlined logistics and compliance in the dairy sector,” says Sodhi, “but the 12% rate on ghee significantly compresses margins for organised brands.” He explains that these brands face stiff competition from untaxed rural or informal alternatives, making it difficult for them to sustain competitive pricing.
The public health perspective is also increasingly gaining attention as cases of adulteration continue to rise. “In rural and tier II-III regions, ghee is frequently replaced with palm oil or adulterated variants. High GST makes pure ghee less competitive and encourages consumers toward unsafe alternatives,” Sodhi says.
Aligning ghee with the 5% GST slab, he argues, would encourage formal, branded supply chains and reduce the appeal of adulterated products.
Impact on farmers and cooperatives
The ghee market in India accounts for 25-30% of milk utilisation. Lowering the GST on ghee to 5% could increase farmer incomes by Rs 2-2.5 per litre, according to Saluja. It would “remove poverty levels” for many suppliers, believes Aggarwal, and for cooperatives, tax relief could be “transformative”.
Devendra Shah, Chairman of Parag Milk Foods, a cooperative, agrees. He says that applying the 5% GST slab across the entire dairy product category will make quality, branded dairy more affordable while also enabling producers to raise procurement prices. “Over time, this can uplift rural livelihoods and ensure that growth in the organised dairy sector directly translates into a better quality of life for India’s farming families,” he adds.
While the farmer case is indeed compelling, experts point out that India’s tax treatment of ghee also stands out on a global scale. Keeping dairy fats in a higher slab than refined oils not only negatively impacts rural livelihoods but also contradicts nutritional policy and international standards.
A significant portion of the Indian ghee market continues to rely on informal and unregulated sources for raw materials.
Global lessons, local urgency
Globally, dairy fats are typically taxed at a lower rate. In the European Union, including France, Germany, and Austria, as well as in the US, essential dairy fats often carry lower or zero taxes. In the UK, for instance, milk, butter, and essential food items are subject to a zero rate of VAT.
The EU’s lower VAT rates for butter highlight its nutritional value, while the UK’s zero-rating ensures affordability. In contrast, industry voices believe that India’s current GST structure, which treats ghee as a semi-luxury item rather than a dietary staple, sends the wrong signal.
“Key economic drivers include fraud reduction through compliance, improved rural incomes through formal channels, and public health protection by reducing adulteration—these factors are critical,” Sodhi stresses.
Notably, past attempts to secure a lower GST have faltered in the Council’s consensus-driven process. However, this time, industry insiders sense a convergence of economic logic, public health arguments, and political optics—illustrated by the upcoming Bihar election in a state deeply connected to dairy. “For once, the industry is united—from private processors to cooperatives to tax experts,” says Saluja.
Former Finance Secretary Subhash Garg, adds : “The fact that so many people debate about such classifications shows the absurdity of making such distinctions between related products and too many rates. Merging 12% slab in 5% is good from the point of view of bringing necessary convergence of rates. A better alternative will be to raise 5% slab to 8% and allow input tax credits on all 5% slab goods which today don’t have the facility of input credit."
He cautions, however, that political compulsions may drive short-term giveaways rather than long-term reform. “The Prime Minister has promised a big Diwali gift. That may translate into effective tax cuts, but it could also delay broader rationalisation.”
The Department of Animal Husbandry & Dairying, the Department of Revenue, the Ministry of Finance, and the GST Council did not respond to emailed requests for comment till the time of publication of this story.
Path Forward
Given dairy’s role in everyday diets and rural employment, the GST Council’s call on ghee carries weight well beyond taxation. A lower rate, experts argue, could be cast as a win for farmers, consumers, and public health alike.
Meanwhile, the Group of Ministers (GoM) on rate rationalisation has backed the Centre’s proposal to move to a simplified two-rate GST structure of 5% and 18%, scrapping the existing 12% and 28% slabs. The recommendation, confirmed by GoM chair and Bihar Deputy CM Samrat Choudhary on August 21, 2025, will now go to the GST Council, set to meet on September 3 and 4, for approval. If cleared, the government's “next-gen” GST regime could be rolled out before Diwali, providing relief to the middle class, MSMEs, and farmers.
Experts say the GST Council may, this time, seek data-backed projections and possibly a phased approach. If ghee and butter move into the 5% slab, consumer prices may fall 6-10%; formal producers could see sales volumes rise by 20-25%; farmers may gain Rs 2-2.5 per litre; and adulterated ghee could lose ground.
As Sodhi sums up: “This is a win-win. Consumers get affordability, farmers get better incomes, and the government gets more compliant tax flows. It’s time to bring fairness to one of India’s most cherished foods.” ghee adulteration substitution palm oil adulterated variants alleged India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil ghee is frequently replaced with palm oil palm oil fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee ghee is frequently replaced with palm oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant adulterated variants ghee is frequently replaced with palm oil or adulterated variants palm oil fflo:commonIn rural and tier II-III regions In rural and tier II-III regions, ghee is frequently replaced with palm oil ghee fflo:hasDefinition improves nutrient absorption, strengthens the immune system, and contains essential vitamins A, D, E, and K improves nutrient absorption, strengthens the immune system, and contains essential vitamins A, D, E, and K ghee fflo:hasDefinition helps with energy production, digestion, and brain development in kids It helps with energy production, digestion, and brain development in kids ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod substitution with palm oil ghee is frequently replaced with palm oil substitution with palm oil fflo:hasFraudType Substitution ghee is frequently replaced with palm oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod adulteration with variants ghee is frequently replaced with palm oil or adulterated variants ghee fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy ghee market in India accounts for 25-30% of milk utilisation ghee fflo:appliesToFood GST Council GST Council's call on ghee carries weightf4:T686,Coconut oil unit sealed in Kanniyakumari for violations thehindu.com The Kanniyakumari Food Safety Department has sealed a coconut oil manufacturing unit and a retail shop at Palugal village in Vilavancode taluk for absence of valid licence, labelling violations and suspected adulteration.
According to Food Safety Department Designated Officer Jeyarama Pandian, the inspection was initiated following a social media video from a Malayalam news channel, which reported that the unit was manufacturing oil and sending it to Kerala at different prices based on quality, raising suspicions of adulteration.
Food Safety officials inspected the manufacturing unit and a nearby retail shop on Wednesday and found that they were operating with an expired licence and failing to comply with labelling protocols. They seized a total of 507 litres of coconut oil from the unit and the shop and sealed them.
Mr. Pandian said the samples had been sent for testing and further action would be taken if adulteration was confirmed.
Published - August 21, 2025 07:32 pm IST coconut oil adulteration substandard mislabeling sealing of coconut oil unit seizure suspected Kanniyakumari, Tamil Nadu, India sealing of coconut oil unit fflo:issuedBy Kanniyakumari Food Safety Department Kanniyakumari Food Safety Department has sealed a coconut oil manufacturing unit coconut oil manufacturing unit fflo:foundAt Palugal village sealed a coconut oil manufacturing unit ... at Palugal village coconut oil manufacturing unit fflo:foundAt Vilavancode taluk at Palugal village in Vilavancode taluk coconut oil manufacturing unit fflo:foundAt Kanniyakumari Coconut oil unit sealed in Kanniyakumarif5:T1913,FSSAI suspends AR Dairy’s licence for ghee over adulteration and false information | Today News livemint.com New Delhi: The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) has suspended the license of A.R. Dairy Food Pvt. Ltd, based in Dindigul, Tamil Nadu, for manufacturing, transporting, and selling ghee. The suspension, effective from 13 June 2025, follows a detailed investigation into serious violations, according to a person in the know and documents seen byMint.
Based on the provisions of the Food Safety and Standards (FSS) Act, 2006, A.R. Dairy and its representatives could face a range of severe penalties like heavy monetary fines, imprisonment, and blacklisting.
The company allegedly supplied adulterated ghee to Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD), with potential foreign fats detected.This action comes after a previous suspension order from 14 February 2025, which was set aside by the Madurai Bench of the Madras High Court, which directed FSSAI to conduct a personal hearing.
Multiple tests, such as gas-liquid chromatography (GLC) and high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), were performed as per the Food Safety Standards Act to check for ghee adulteration. These tests analyze the ghee's fatty acid profile. The presence of plant-based compounds like β-sitosterol, which are not found in pure milk fat, confirms adulteration.
Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams trust manages the operations and finances of the Venkateswara Temple in Tirumala, and is one of the most visited religious centres globally.
The FSSAI's decision follows a previous suspension order from 14 February 2025, which was set aside by the Madurai Bench of the Madras High Court. The court had directed the FSSAI to give the company a personal hearing before issuing a new decision.
Following this directive, a hearing was held on 3 June 2025, where A.R. Dairy Food representatives failed to provide satisfactory explanations or documentary evidence to FSSAI’s Designated Officer addressing these allegations.
The FSSAI cited several serious contraventions. First, the company was found to be selling and distributing ghee to TTD without a proper license for repackaging or relabeling. The company was not licensed for this activity.
Second, the dairy provided false information to both FSSAI and TTD, claiming that the ghee was manufactured at their Dindigul facility. In reality, the ghee was procured from another firm, Sri Vyshnavi Dairy Specialties in Andhra Pradesh. During the personal hearing, company representatives admitted there was no written agreement with Sri Vyshnavi Dairy, stating the arrangement was made in "good faith". They also could not provide information about the traceability of four lots of ghee that were rejected by TTD and returned to Sri Vyshnavi Dairy.
Queries sent to the Union health secretary, health ministry spokesperson, FSSAI headquarters in New Delhi, FSSAI’s Southern Regional Office in Chennai, Central Bureau of Investigation and A.R. Dairy remained unanswered till press time. TTD and Sri Vyshnavi Dairy could not be contacted.
The FSSAI noted this was a violation, as the company failed to report the rejection of the supplied ghee to the food authority.
The suspension order, seen by Mint, stated that the Designated Officer concluded that the company's submissions did not clear them of the violations. The FSSAI stated that the company appeared to have the intention of deceiving consumers and manipulating the process by providing false information.
The FSSAI highlighted a major discrepancy between A.R. Dairy’s declared production and the quantity supplied to TTD. According to annual returns, the company produced 14.15 MT of ghee in 2021-22 and 155 MT in 2023-24. Yet, the tender agreement required them to supply 850 MT over six months—far exceeding their reported capacity.
The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) is still investigating the matter.
“The case serves as a warning to other food businesses that such violations will not be tolerated, protecting consumers from potentially adulterated products and false information,” the person familiar with the matter said, requesting anonymity.
The FSSAI ensures food safety through regular, risk-based inspections and random sampling of food products. Both the central and state food safety departments conduct these checks to ensure compliance with quality and safety standards. ghee adulteration mislabeling unclear ghee from Sri Vyshnavi Dairy Specialties license suspension alleged Dindigul, Tamil Nadu, India license suspension of A.R. Dairy fflo:issuedBy FSSAI The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) has suspended the license of A.R. Dairy Food Pvt. Ltd ghee fflo:hasAdulterant ghee from Sri Vyshnavi Dairy Specialties ghee was procured from another firm, Sri Vyshnavi Dairy Specialties ghee fflo:hasAdulterant β-sitosterol presence of plant-based compounds like β-sitosterol, which are not found in pure milk fat, confirms adulteration adulterated ghee finding fflo:foundAtStep Distribution supplied adulterated ghee to Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams A.R. Dairy Food Pvt. Ltd fflo:foundAt Tamil Nadu A.R. Dairy Food Pvt. Ltd, based in Dindigul, Tamil Nadu ghee adulteration finding fflo:identifies β-sitosterol The presence of plant-based compounds like β-sitosterol... confirms adulteration ghee adulteration finding fflo:producedBy gas-liquid chromatography tests, such as gas-liquid chromatography (GLC) and high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), were performed ghee adulteration finding fflo:producedBy high-performance liquid chromatography high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), were performed ghee adulteration finding fflo:triggeredAction license suspension of A.R. Dairy FSSAI has suspended the license... follows a detailed investigation ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod substitution of source ghee was procured from another firm, Sri Vyshnavi Dairy Specialties ghee fflo:foundAt Sri Vyshnavi Dairy Specialties ghee was procured from another firm, Sri Vyshnavi Dairy Specialties A.R. Dairy Food Pvt. Ltd fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional intention of deceiving consumers and manipulating the process Suspension order fflo:issuedBy FSSAI The suspension order, seen by Mint Failure to report ghee rejection fflo:constitutes Violation of production reporting FSSAI noted this was a violation, as the company failed to report the rejectionf6:T605,16k litres of fake coconut oil seized | Thiruvananthapuram News - Times of India indiatimes.com T'puram: The state govt seized 16,565 litres of coconut oil of suspicious quality in seven districts after the food safety department conducted surprise inspections of production and marketing centres, said health minister Veena George.
The inspections were conducted after complaints regarding the quality of coconut oil were received by the department due to rising prices. The minister stated that inspections will continue. 
The largest seizure of fake coconut oil was from Kollam district. In Kollam, 9,337 litres of coconut oil, including 5,800 litres of the Kera Surya and Kera Haritham brands, were seized, which were packed with fake FSSAI numbers and addresses for sale. In Alappuzha, 6,530 litres of fake coconut oil were seized. 
The public can report complaints about the quality of coconut oil to toll-free number 1800 425 1125. TNN coconut oil adulteration counterfeit mislabeling fake coconut oil seizure alleged Kollam, Kerala, India fake coconut oil fflo:commonIn Kollam largest seizure of fake coconut oil was from Kollam district Seizure of fake coconut oil fflo:foundAtStep Production inspections of production and marketing centres coconut oil fflo:hasAdulterant fake coconut oil seized 16,565 litres of coconut oil of suspicious quality Kera Surya fflo:hasAdulterant fake FSSAI numbers packed with fake FSSAI numbers Kera Haritham fflo:hasAdulterant fake FSSAI numbers packed with fake FSSAI numbers and addresses for salef7:T10ba,Dalda, refined oil, a dash of artificial essence: How fake ghee was sold under Amul, Mother Dairy brands in UP’s Sambhal indianexpress.com Dalda, refined oil, a dash of artificial essence: How fake ghee was sold under Amul, Mother Dairy brands in UP’s Sambhal
Police busted the fake ghee manufacturing racket on Friday and arrested five men who have been running the operation for years.
The police in Uttar Pradesh’s Sambhal on Friday seized 923 litres of fake ghee, hundreds of counterfeit wrappers of popular brands, and arrested five men who have been running the racket for years.
The operation was carried out in a joint drive by the Dhanari police and the Special Operations Group near Khajra Mod. The officers intercepted a car and a mini truck suspected of carrying the fake ghee and found 41 cardboard boxes, each holding 900-ml packets of ‘Amul’ desi ghee, 20 tins of ‘Madhusudan’ ghee, each weighing 15 kg, along with packaging materials of other brands, the police said.
The five arrested have been identified as Ashu Jain, his father Sudesh Jain, Avid — all residents of Meerut — Praveen Jain, and Arun Kumar, both from Baraut in Baghpat district.
The group was manufacturing the fake ghee at Praveen Jain’s house in Baraut.
According to the police, the gang manufactured fake ghee using a mixture of Dalda and refined oil, along with artificial ghee essence to mimic the smell of pure ghee. The product was then packed into counterfeit pouches of Amul, Madhusudan, and Mother Dairy and sent to market, said an officer.
Officers also claimed that the fraudsters had been repackaging Mayur salt into Tata Salt packets and selling expired coffee in Nescafé jars for the past three years.
Based on information from the accused, the police conducted a raid at Praveen Jain’s home, and recovered the equipment used in the operation — two gas stoves, a gas cylinder, a beater, two packing machines, a 40-litre silver soaking machine, a sack-stitching sewing machine, an iron press, bottles of artificial essence, brand-printing dyes, scissors, tape cutters, pliers, adhesive, and hundreds of empty cartons and wrappers of leading brands.
The police have also seized 466 brand wrappers, five mobile phones, and the two vehicles used for transporting the items.
The accused have been booked under various sections of the Food Safety and Standards Act and the Trade Marks Act. They were produced before the court and remanded in judicial custody.
The police said they are probing the racket’s distribution network to ascertain how widely the counterfeit products had been circulated. ghee adulteration seized recall_triggered India, UP’s Sambhal fake ghee fflo:hasAdulterant Dalda Dalda, refined oil, a dash of artificial essence: How fake ghee was sold fake ghee fflo:hasAdulterant Dalda Dalda, refined oil, a dash of artificial essence: How fake ghee was sold fake ghee fflo:hasAdulterant Dalda manufactured fake ghee using a mixture of Dalda fake ghee fflo:hasAdulterant refined oil the gang manufactured fake ghee using a mixture of Dalda and refined oil fake ghee fflo:hasAdulterant artificial ghee essence the gang manufactured fake ghee using a mixture of Dalda and refined oil, along with artificial ghee essence to mimic the smell of pure ghee fake ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod mimicking smell with artificial essence the gang manufactured fake ghee using a mixture of Dalda and refined oil, along with artificial ghee essence to mimic the smell of pure ghee Mayur salt fflo:hasAdulterationMethod repackaging into Tata Salt packets repackaging Mayur salt into Tata Salt packets fake ghee manufacturing racket prov:wasAssociatedWith Sudesh Jain arrested five men who have been running the operation for years fake ghee manufacturing racket prov:wasAssociatedWith Praveen Jain arrested five men... Praveen Jain fake ghee manufacturing racket prov:wasAssociatedWith Arun Kumar arrested five men... Arun Kumar mimicking smell with artificial essence fflo:hasFraudType Masking mimic the smell of pure ghee repackaging into counterfeit pouches fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling counterfeit pouches of Amul, Madhusudan, and Mother Dairy repackaging into Tata Salt packets fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling repackaging Mayur salt into Tata Salt packetsf8:Tc97,Coconut oil mills in Kangayam struggle to stem slide in production despite healthy market conditions thehindu.com On the face of it, the tidings seem favourable for the nearly 120 coconut mills in Kangayam town of Tiruppur district where oil production capacity ranges from 1,000 tonnes to 1,400 tonnes a day.
Wholesale price of milling copra rules at ₹250 to ₹260 a kg, and that of coconut oil is ₹340 to ₹400 a kg, which the manufacturers view as a healthy parity. As the output of coconut had dwindled in recent years, the demand for copra and coconut oil had witnessed a surge.
Reduction in the wholesale to the present level from the all-time high of ₹500 a kg during July notwithstanding, though the prevailing dynamics ought to be favourable for the industries, the reality is that nearly half of the mills find themselves in a spot of bother.
The margins of these member units of Kangayam Coconut oil Manufacturers Association have shrunk substantially because of the unchecked sale of adulterated product in the market, according to industry insiders.
“The State Government has to step in and rein in sale of adulterated coconut oil for cooking purpose. Companies selling adulterated products with brand names do not exist at all,” Association president N. Dhanapal said.
Mr. Dhanapal, who is also the proprietor of the NSN Group of companies, Kangayam, said the sale of coconut oil with purity had taken a hit due to the market getting flooded with adulterated product.
The adulteration is to the extent of 80 per cent. “It is difficult for the consumers to determine adulteration even if 80 per cent of refined sunflower oil or palm oil is blended with 20 per cent coconut oil,” Mr. Dhanapal said, calling for lab tests of the adulterated coconut oil to unravel the fraud.
Compared to the conditions a year back when only 10 coconut oil mills were functional due to acute shortage of inputs, the situation is far better now.
At present, there is copra availability to a considerable extent as the coconut production improved in subsequent months, but for the oil mills in Kangayam, the bane ironically persists even when the market conditions have improved. Adulterated coconut oil surface in the market in large quantities whenever the price escalates in the market, the manufacturers rue.
Published - August 07, 2025 08:35 pm IST coconut oil adulteration substitution dilution sunflower oil palm oil alleged Kangayam, Tiruppur, Tamil Nadu, India coconut oil fflo:hasAdulterant sunflower oil 80 per cent of refined sunflower oil or palm oil is blended with 20 per cent coconut oil coconut oil fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil 80 per cent of refined sunflower oil or palm oil is blended with 20 per cent coconut oil sunflower oil fflo:isSubstituteFor coconut oil 80 per cent of refined sunflower oil or palm oil is blended with 20 per cent coconut oil blending refined sunflower or palm oil with coconut oil fflo:hasFraudType Dilution 80 per cent of refined sunflower oil or palm oil is blended with 20 per cent coconut oil blending refined sunflower or palm oil with coconut oil fflo:hasFraudType Substitution 80 per cent of refined sunflower oil or palm oil is blended with 20 per cent coconut oilf9:Ta83,Punjab: Maximum adulteration in ‘paneer’, ‘desi ghee’, says health minister hindustantimes.com Punjab: Maximum adulteration in ‘paneer’, ‘desi ghee’, says health minister
According to Punjab and family welfare minister Dr Balbir Singh, out of 531 samples of ‘paneer’, 196 samples were found sub-standard and 59 were unsafe for consumption
The maximum adulteration has been found in ‘paneer’ and ‘desi ghee’, Punjab and family welfare minister Dr Balbir Singh said on Wednesday. The minister said out of 531 samples of ‘paneer’, 196 samples were found sub-standard and 59 were unsafe for consumption. “There is maximum adulteration in paneer (cheese) and ‘desi ghee’ (clarified butter),” said Singh. The sample results of unsafe paneer show that starch or some chemicals were used to make them, he said.
Regarding ‘desi ghee’, the minister said the health authorities took 222 samples and of which 20 were of sub-standard quality and 28 were unsafe for consumption. The minister advised people to purchase ‘paneer’ and ‘desi ghee’ from known sources like Verka.
The minister informed that in the last five years, around 145 people were convicted and sentenced to six months’ imprisonment for making unsafe products, especially ‘paneer’ and ‘desi ghee’.
Dr Balbir Singh also exhorted people to make maximum use of the ‘Food Safety on Wheels’ initiative, which has now been expanded to all districts. These mobile food testing vans are equipped for screening of adulteration among major categories of food, including milk, paneer, water and other daily consumables. “I urge every individual to get their food tested,” said the health minister.
The minister informed that under the current state government, a total of 18,559 enforcement samples along with 12,178 surveillance samples have been collected by the department. Additionally, over 13,000 samples have been screened for adulteration on Food Safety on Wheels so far, he said, while adding that the major categories include paneer, ghee, milk, spices, fruits and vegetable, sweets, khoa, etc. (With PTI inputs) ghee adulteration adulteration_finding recall_triggered Punjab, India desi ghee adulteration finding fflo:foundIn desi ghee The maximum adulteration has been found in ‘paneer’ and ‘desi ghee’ paneer fflo:hasAdulterant starch starch or some chemicals were used to make them paneer fflo:hasAdulterant chemicals starch or some chemicals were used to make them paneer fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy paneer (cheese) Food Safety on Wheels fflo:producesIndicator screening of adulteration mobile food testing vans are equipped for screening of adulterationfa:T964,Dry fruit oil traders under scanner ahead of Rakshabandhan indiatimes.com Noida: District food safety teams seized over 340 kg of food items suspected to be unsafe during inspections across Noida, Greater Noida, and Dadri, as part of a crackdown ahead of the Rakshabandhan festival on Aug 9.
The action targeted sweet shops, food processors, and traders. Items seized included refined oils and dry fruits, both widely used in the making of sweets. At Sundar Trading in Itehra village in Greater Noida West, officials seized 150 kg of refined rice bran oil suspected to be adulterated. Another team confiscated 15 kg of raisins and 178 kg of refined soybean oil from Muskan Traders, located in Noida's Kulesara village, after no batch numbers or expiry dates were found on the product packaging.
Food safety teams also destroyed 35 kg of adulterated khoya (milk solids) at Namaste Sweets in Greater Noida's Surajpur industrial area. Samples of milk and chenna from the same unit were also sent for lab testing. Inspections were also carried out at sweet shops in Noida's sectors 31, 43, 44, and 52, including outlets like Haldiram's, Om Sweets, Agarwal Sweets, and Bikaner Malaiwala. Officials collected samples of sweets, including ghevar and barfi, and used cooking oil for testing.
"With the festival approaching, the demand for sweets has shot up. Many of these seized items, like oil and dry fruits, are key ingredients in sweets preparation," said the assistant commissioner (Food) Sarvesh Mishra. "We are intensifying checks to ensure that only safe, standard-compliant food reaches consumers."
In total, 14 samples were taken and sent to the lab. Further action will follow based on the test reports. Inspections will continue across the district in the lead-up to the festival. rice bran oil soybean oil adulteration mislabeling seizure suspected Greater Noida, Gautam Buddha Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, India Noida, Gautam Buddha Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, India refined rice bran oil fflo:hasAdulterant unknown adulterant in rice bran oil seized 150 kg of refined rice bran oil suspected to be adulterated khoya fflo:hasAdulterant unknown adulterant in khoya destroyed 35 kg of adulterated khoya chenna sample fflo:collectedAt Processing Samples of milk and chenna from the same unit were also sent for lab testing Laboratory Analysis fso:isPerformedOn 14 samples 14 samples were taken and sent to the labfb:Tbc1,Court fines 2 for selling adulterated mustard oil in Ghaziabad | Noida News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Ghaziabad: The Court of Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate (ACJM) in Ghaziabad sentenced two individuals till the rise of the court and imposed a Rs 25,000 fine each for storing and selling substandard mustard oil.
The duo was convicted under sections 51 and 59 (i) of the Food Safety and Standards Act (FSSA) 2006 on Thursday. The defendants pleaded guilty and requested leniency.
The adulterated oil was being sold at the New Kirana Store located in the Municipal Market, Ghantaghar area. Acting on a tip-off, a team led by food safety officer Meera Singh purchased a sample of the oil from the shop on September 20, 2024, and sent it for laboratory testing.
The team obtained a signature and stamp on the procured sample from the proprietor of the shop, Ansar Mallick, who informed the officials that he purchased the oil from a supplier named Mahadev Enterprises.
The prosecution informed the court that the analysis report of the sample revealed that the oil was not only substandard but also unsafe for human consumption, and demanded stringent punishment for Ansari and Meena, the authorised representative of Mahadev Enterprises. The oil was manufactured by SK Oils Limited, which produced documents claiming that Mahadev Enterprises was operating under a royalty arrangement.
The court imposed a fine of Rs 20,000 each under Section 51 of the FSSA for storing and selling substandard mustard oil, and a fine of Rs 5,000 each under Section 59 (i) of the Act for endangering public health. mustard oil substandard unsafe_food fine of Rs 20,000 each under Section 51 of the FSSA fine of Rs 5,000 each under Section 59 (i) of the Act unclear Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh, India storing and selling substandard mustard oil fflo:triggeredAction fine of Rs 20,000 each under Section 51 of the FSSA The court imposed a fine of Rs 20,000 each under Section 51 of the FSSA for storing and selling substandard mustard oil court fine for substandard mustard oil fflo:targets mustard oil fine of Rs 20,000 each under Section 51 of the FSSA for storing and selling substandard mustard oil Adulteration of mustard oil at New Kirana Store prov:wasAssociatedWith Meena Meena, the authorised representative of Mahadev Enterprises Laboratory analysis of mustard oil sample fso:isPerformedOn Sample of mustard oil from New Kirana Store sent it for laboratory testing mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant substandard mustard oil analysis report of the sample revealed that the oil was not only substandard Court fine for Ansar Mallick and Meena fflo:targets mustard oil imposed a Rs 25,000 fine each for storing and selling substandard mustard oil manufacturing of substandard mustard oil prov:wasAssociatedWith SK Oils Limited oil was manufactured by SK Oils Limited court fine for endangering public health fflo:targets mustard oil fine of Rs 5,000 each under Section 59 (i) of the Act for endangering public healthfc:Tee8,Coconut oil price skyrockets, crosses Rs 500 per litre newindianexpress.com KOCHI: As Keralites start preparations for Onam celebrations, the rising prices of essentials, especially coconut and coconut oil, are worrying families. The price of coconut oil which hovered around Rs 160 per litre a year ago has crossed Rs 500, making it out of bounds for common man. Coconut oil has been deeply ingrained in the state’s culture and traditions that it is an inevitable ingredient for its traditional cuisine.
Meanwhile, the sale of other products like groundnut oil and palm oil has increased as coconut oil has become unaffordable. There are reports that adulterated coconut oil is flooding the market posing a health risk.
Kerafed, the largest producer of coconut oil in the country has hiked the price of coconut oil to Rs 529 per litre while the price of many popular brands has crossed Rs 600. The price of coconut in the retail market ranges between Rs 75 to Rs 85 per kg.
“There will not be any scarcity of coconut oil during Onam season as we have maintained an average stock of 912.2 metric tonnes of copra from January to June,” said Kerafed managing director Saju Surendran.
Farmers say they get an average price of Rs 62 per kg, which is a bumper price considering the fact that the procurement rate was just Rs 8 per kg a couple of years back. Though the steep rise in procurement rate has brought cheers, farmers are unable to reap the benefit as the production has declined to a fraction of the previous year yield.
“The coconut prices have gone up due to drop in production caused by drought in 2024. Now the production has started increasing thanks to copious rains in the previous months. The crisis is expected to end by December 2025 and the prices may decline thereafter,” said Dinesh a farmer in Palakkad.
“There has been a steep decline in coconut production which has affected our business. We have rescheduled the production to a single shift due to shortage of coconut. The company has not exported coconut oil for the past two months.
There are many reasons like the spike in demand for desiccated coconut powder and coconut milk in the USA, rise in demand for tender coconut in North India and West Asia and the dip in production,” said Varappetty Cooperative Society president M G Ramakrishnan.
The rise in price of coconut oil has pushed the catering and bakery industry into crisis as they are not able to compromise on quality and pricing due to stiff competition.
“We purchase around 1,000 litres of coconut oil per month and the price hike has brought an additional burden of Rs 3 lakh. We are unable to hike the prices due to competition. Coconut and coconut oil are important ingredients that decide the taste of the Sadya and we cannot shift to cheaper products,” said All Kerala Caterers Association treasurer M G Sreevatsan.
“The price of coconut oil has crossed Rs 500 per litre and we are forced to increase the price of banana chips. The price of chips has increased from Rs 428 to Rs 560 per kg during the past two months,” said K S Rajendran of Kalarickal Chips and Spices in Alappuzha.
Refuting allegations that spike in procurement of coconut by China is the reason for the scarcity, sources at the Coconut Development Board said production has dropped in all coconut producing countries. “China procures coconut from Indonesia as the prices are half that of India. But the situation is gradually changing as production has increased in the past two weeks. Prices will start stabilising now and will normalise in another two months,” said an official. coconut oil adulteration unknown suspected Kochi, Ernakulam, Kerala, India adulterated coconut oil fflo:causesEffect health risk adulterated coconut oil is flooding the market posing a health riskfd:Te23,Maharashtra News: Minister Narhari Zirwal Announces Suspension Of 2 FDA Officials, Closure Of Nandurbar Factory Over Oil Adulteration freepressjournal.in Mumbai, Jul 7: Maharashtra Food and Civil Supplies Minister Narhari Zirwal on Monday announced immediate suspension of two Food and Drug Administration (FDA) officials and closure of a factory in Nandurbar district found guilty several times of oil adulteration.
Replying to a question raised by Shiv Sena MLA Amshya Padvi in the assembly, Zirwal said the joint commissioner and assistant commissioner of FDA would be suspended for failing to act promptly against the factory in Akkalkuwa despite multiple instances of adulteration being reported.
Supplementary questions were raised by legislator Sameer Kunawar, who pointed out that samples of soybean and groundnut oil collected recently from the same factory were found to be adulterated.
"Swift action was expected, but the concerned officers failed to act, which has now resulted in disciplinary action. Officials found responsible in the case of substandard edible oil in Nandurbar district will be suspended, and the concerned company will be shut down," Zirwal informed the House.
On March 10, FDA officials inspected Gopal Provision, a firm based in Akkalkuwa, where samples of Mahika brand refined soybean oil and Kamla brand groundnut oil were collected for testing, with preliminary reports finding these to be non-compliant with food safety standards, the minister said.
As the vendor appealed against the findings, the samples have now been sent for re-analysis to Central Food Technological Research Institute (CFTRI) in Mysuru in Karnataka, Zirwal said in the assembly.
During 2024-25, a total of 12 edible oil samples were collected in Nandurbar district, out of which five were declared substandard, with legal proceedings initiated under Food Safety and Standards Act 2006 in two of these cases.
Reports from referral laboratories are awaited in the the remaining three, Zirwal said while assuring strict action against violators of food safety regulations.
In a separate discussion, Minister-in-Charge Shambhuraj Desai informed the assembly that a panel of architects and financial experts has been appointed to study the redevelopment of 81 buildings under the Umarkhadi Redevelopment Committee in Mumbai.
The report is expected within three months, after which a decision will be taken, Desai said.
Assembly Speaker Rahul Narwekar, during proceedings, directed that a report on alleged irregularities in the procurement and distribution of rice under the public distribution system (PDS) be submitted to the House before the end of the current session.
The directive followed complaints raised by senior Congress leader Nana Patole regarding large-scale corruption in the PDS supply chain.
(Disclaimer: Except for the headline, this article has not been edited by FPJ's editorial team and is auto-generated from an agency feed.) soybean oil groundnut oil adulteration substandard suspension closure suspected Akkalkuwa, Nandurbar, Maharashtra, India re-analysis fso:isPerformedAt Central Food Technological Research Institute samples have now been sent for re-analysis to Central Food Technological Research Institute Kamla brand groundnut oil fflo:belongsToCategory Edible Oils Kamla brand groundnut oil Oil Adulteration Act at Gopal Provision prov:used groundnut oil samples of Mahika brand refined soybean oil and Kamla brand groundnut oil were collected substandard edible oil finding fflo:triggeredAction legal proceedings five were declared substandard, with legal proceedings initiatedfe:Ta02,Substandard edible oil found in Nandurbar: Minister warns of action indianexpress.com Several edible oil samples collected in Nandurbar district have failed to meet food safety standards, and action will be taken against the guilty, Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Minister Narhari Zirwal informed the Maharashtra Legislative Assembly during Question Hour on Monday.
The matter was raised by MLA Aamshya Padvi, with follow-up questions from members Sameer Kunawar and Hiraman Khoskar.
Responding to the question in the Lower House, Minister Zirwal said that on March 10, the FDA inspected the Gopal Provision Store in Akkalkuwa.
During the inspection, samples of Mahika brand refined soybean oil and Kamla brand groundnut oil were collected for testing.
Preliminary reports indicated that the samples were substandard as per food safety norms.
Following an appeal by the vendor, the samples were sent for further analysis to the Central Food Technological Research Institute (CFTRI) in Mysuru.
Zirwal added that in the financial year 2024–25, 12 edible oil samples were tested in the district, of which five were found to be of inferior quality.
“Out of these, legal action has been initiated in two cases under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. The remaining three are awaiting final reports from referral laboratories,” the minister said.
Zirwal told the House that strict measures will be taken against those found violating food safety norms.
Meanwhile, Women and Child Welfare Minister Aditi Tatkare also ordered the suspension of a zilla parishad CEO after it was found that an anganwadi worker was drawing salary on behalf of a deceased worker in Nandurbar’s Akkalkuwa district. edible oil refined soybean oil groundnut oil substandard Legal action under Food Safety and Standards Act suspected Nandurbar, Maharashtra, India Substandard edible oil finding in Nandurbar fflo:inRegion Nandurbar Substandard edible oil found in Nandurbar Substandard edible oil finding in Nandurbar fflo:foundIn groundnut oil samples of Mahika brand refined soybean oil and Kamla brand groundnut oil were collected for testing. Preliminary reports indicated that the samples were substandard Substandard edible oil finding in Nandurbar fflo:producedBy LaboratoryTest samples were sent for further analysis to the Central Food Technological Research Institute Substandard edible oil finding in Nandurbar fflo:triggeredAction Legal action under Food Safety and Standards Act legal action has been initiated in two cases under the Food Safety and Standards Actff:Tf76,Maharashtra News: Rural Development Minister Jaikumar Gore Announces Suspension Of 2 Engineers Over Irregular Payments freepressjournal.in Mumbai, July 7: Maharashtra Rural Development Minister Jaikumar Gore on Monday in the state council announced the suspension of two engineers from public work departments under the jurisdiction of Chhatrapati Sambhajinagar Zilla Parishad.
The department engineer and executive engineer were suspended for paying Rs 1.47 crore to the contractor even before the commencement of the construction of the school in Lasur village and the building of the primary health centre at Gurdhanora village from Chhatrapati Sambhajinagar.
The minister, in his reply to questions by Satish Chavan (NCP) and the Leader of the Opposition, Ambadas Danve, said that further action will be taken against the concerned engineers after the completion of the departmental inquiry in two months.
Minister Gore said that an inquiry has been conducted regarding this construction, and the assessment of the work has been recorded in the measurement book for more than the actual work done. Payments have been approved even without photos and test reports of the work. These payments have been made despite the standard operating procedure about when and how the payment should be made.
Meanwhile, Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Narahari Zirwal announced that two department officers will be suspended in connection with the supply of substandard edible oil in the tribal-dominated Nandurbar district of North Maharashtra. The suspension of these two officers is being done based on the findings of the department’s inspection of some edible oil samples to be of substandard quality.
He told the state assembly that the department will initiate action for the closure of the concerned company, which has produced and distributed substandard edible oil. He was replying to a question raised by Shiv Sena legislator Amshaya Padvi Sameer Kunawar and Hiraman Khoskar.
During inspection, samples of Mahika brand refined soybean oil and Kamala brand peanut oil were collected for analysis
According to the preliminary report received, these samples were found to be non-conforming as per food safety standards. As the seller appealed, the samples have been sent to the Central Food Technological Research Institute, Mysore, for re-analysis, said Minister Zirwal.
During the year 2024-25, a total of 12 samples of edible oil were tested in the Nandurbar district and out of them, five samples were declared of substandard quality. In two of these cases, action is underway under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006, and the remaining three samples are awaiting the test report from the referral laboratory, he said, adding that strict action will be taken against those violating food safety rules.
(Disclaimer: Except for the headline, this article has not been edited by FPJ's editorial team and is auto-generated from an agency feed.) soybean oil peanut oil substandard suspension closure suspected Nandurbar, Maharashtra, India IncidentFinding_Mahika_Nandurbar fflo:inRegion Nandurbar district supply of substandard edible oil in the tribal-dominated Nandurbar district IncidentFinding_Kamala_Nandurbar fflo:inRegion Nandurbar district supply of substandard edible oil in the tribal-dominated Nandurbar district re-analysis of oil samples fso:isPerformedAt Central Food Technological Research Institute, Mysore sent to the Central Food Technological Research Institute, Mysore, for re-analysis IncidentFinding_Mahika_Nandurbar fflo:triggeredAction RegulatoryAction_Closure_Company department will initiate action for the closure of the concerned company RegulatoryAction_Closure_Company fflo:targets concerned company closure of the concerned company, which has produced and distributed substandard edible oil Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 fflo:appliesToFood edible oil action is underway under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006100:T1710,575 litres of adulterated ghee, 7,000 kg of ginger-garlic paste seized in Hyderabad; here’s what it can do to your body indianexpress.com Food adulteration is at an all-time high, and the latest example has surfaced from Hyderabad, where a crackdown on illegal food manufacturing units has led to alarming discoveries. According to a report by The Hindu, authorities seized 575 litres of adulterated ghee and 7,000 kg of contaminated ginger-garlic paste from units operating across LB Nagar, Maheshwaram, Malkajgiri, and Bhongir.
These units were running without Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) approvals or trade licences. Officials also found expired raw materials, banned synthetic food colours, and highly unhygienic conditions.
While such headlines raise concerns about public health, it’s crucial to understand the potential effects of consuming these adulterated products, and how to detect them.
Deepalakshmi, a registered dietitian at The Cleft and Craniofacial Centre, Sree Balaji Medical College & Hospital, Chennai, told indianexpress.com that ginger-garlic paste is often bulked up with starch such as maida or cornflour. “It may also contain artificial colours and preservatives to make it appear fresh and last longer. In some cases, spoiled or old ginger and garlic are reused,” she explained.
Consuming such paste can cause digestive issues like gas, acidity, or diarrhoea. “Over time, it may also affect your liver and kidneys,” she said. Some individuals may experience allergies, skin problems, or respiratory issues due to chemical adulterants. Moreover, when the paste is impure, it loses natural benefits such as aiding digestion, reducing inflammation, and fighting infections.
As for ghee, she noted it is frequently adulterated with vanaspati, animal fat, starch, or artificial flavourings —– substances that mimic the look of pure ghee but are harmful. “Vanaspati is high in trans fats, which increase bad cholesterol and raise the risk of heart disease. It’s also harder to digest and may lead to weight gain or liver damage,” Deepalakshmi warned. Regular consumption of such adulterated ghee can slowly harm the body.
According to her, there are some easy ways to check for adulteration at home. “For ginger-garlic paste, you can add a few drops of iodine to a spoonful. If it turns blue or black, starch is present. You can also put the paste in a glass of water. If white powder settles at the bottom, it likely contains maida. A sour or strange smell could mean that spoiled ingredients were used,” Deepalakshmi said.
To test ghee, put a small amount in the fridge for a few hours. “Pure ghee will solidify evenly. If it forms layers or has a different texture, it may be mixed with other fats. When melted, pure ghee becomes clear. Adulterated ghee may leave residue or have an unpleasant smell,” she said. To avoid these risks, always read the label and buy products from trusted brands. Look for the FSSAI mark.
For ginger-garlic paste, check that the ingredients include only ginger, garlic, and a small amount of oil or salt. Avoid very cheap products or loose ghee sold without proper packaging. If possible, prepare small amounts of ginger-garlic paste at home.
Using adulterated food items may not show immediate effects, but over time, they can cause serious health problems. ghee adulteration vanaspati animal fat starch artificial flavourings seizure alleged Hyderabad, LB Nagar, Maheshwaram, Malkajgiri, Bhongir, Telangana, India ginger-garlic paste fflo:hasAdulterant maida ginger-garlic paste is often bulked up with starch such as maida ginger-garlic paste fflo:hasAdulterant cornflour ginger-garlic paste is often bulked up with starch such as maida or cornflour ginger-garlic paste fflo:hasAdulterant artificial colours ginger-garlic paste is often bulked up with starch such as maida or cornflour. “It may also contain artificial colours chemical adulterants fflo:causesEffect allergies experience allergies, skin problems, or respiratory issues due to chemical adulterants chemical adulterants fflo:causesEffect skin problems experience allergies, skin problems, or respiratory issues due to chemical adulterants chemical adulterants fflo:causesEffect respiratory issues respiratory issues due to chemical adulterants ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vanaspati ghee, she noted it is frequently adulterated with vanaspati ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat ghee, she noted it is frequently adulterated with vanaspati, animal fat ghee fflo:hasAdulterant starch ghee, she noted it is frequently adulterated with vanaspati, animal fat, starch ghee fflo:hasAdulterant artificial flavourings ghee, she noted it is frequently adulterated with vanaspati, animal fat, starch, or artificial flavourings ginger-garlic paste fflo:hasAdulterant preservatives It may also contain artificial colours and preservatives to make it appear fresh ginger-garlic paste fflo:hasAdulterant spoiled ginger In some cases, spoiled or old ginger and garlic are reused ginger-garlic paste fflo:hasAdulterant spoiled garlic In some cases, spoiled or old ginger and garlic are reused ginger-garlic paste fflo:causesEffect digestive issues Consuming such paste can cause digestive issues refrigeration test fflo:producesIndicator uneven solidification or layering If it forms layers or has a different texture, it may be mixed with other fats. ginger-garlic paste fflo:hasIngredient ginger check that the ingredients include only ginger ginger-garlic paste fflo:hasIngredient garlic check that the ingredients include only ginger, garlic ginger-garlic paste fflo:hasIngredient oil and a small amount of oil or salt ginger-garlic paste fflo:hasIngredient salt and a small amount of oil or salt adulterated food items fflo:causesEffect chronic health issues may not show immediate effects, but over time, they can cause serious health problems101:T1632,575 liters of adulterated ghee and 7000 kg of ginger-garlic paste seized in Hyderabad: How to do purity check at home - The Times of India indiatimes.com Food adulteration has become increasingly common, raising serious concerns about public health. Frequently adulterated items in the market include milk, paneer, ghee, ginger-garlic paste, turmeric, and various other spices.
As per a report by The Hindu, a special crackdown on unauthorized and unhygienic food manufacturing units in Hyderabad has led to the seizure of hundreds of liters of ghee and ginger-garlic paste across the LB Nagar, Maheshwaram, Malkajgiri, and Bhongir zones. According to the report, many units were functioning without Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) licences or trade licences. In multiple locations, expired raw materials and banned synthetic food colours were also found, along with unhygienic working conditions. 
If we go by the report, 575 liters of adulterated ghee and 3946 kg of adulterated ginger-garlic paste were seized in LB Nagar. In Malkajgiri, 3,037 kilograms of adulterated ginger-garlic paste and immunity-boosting tablets and powders, including vitamin and protein supplements, were seized. In Bhongir, officials seized 35 kilograms of adulterated paneer and approximately 250 kilograms of adulterated snack mixtures.
According to the report, other adulterated food products found during the raids include milk, turmeric powder, coriander powder, sweets, biscuits, bakery items, ice cream, and mineral water.
While adulteration of ghee and other edible items has become quite common, it is important for the masses to take extra care while buying foods. Here are a few tips and tricks one can follow while buying ghee and identify fake ghee.
Appearance and texture: Traditionally, ghee in its purest form has a golden color, rich and creamy texture. When held against light it should appear translucent and clear. The pale color of ghee could be indicative of preservatives and one should avoid it.
Packaging and label: It is important to pay special attention to the packaging and label of ghee products. A genuine ghee brand will have all major certificates of regulation compliances on it. The license number, date of packaging, expiry should be thoroughly checked before buying ghee.
Aroma and flavor: Naturally, ghee has a nutty flavor and a smooth consistency. The ghee should never smell burnt as it has a high heating point. The burnt smell could be because of the presence of water or addons. Hence, such ghee should be avoided at all costs.
While one can judge the ghee using the above-mentioned criteria before buying it, there are also other ways by which you can ensure that the ghee you are consuming is beneficial.
Palm test: Simply, pour frozen ghee on your palm and if it starts melting instantly then the ghee is pure. Else, it is not and such ghee should be avoided.
Water test: Fill a glass of normal water at room temperature, add ghee to it, if the ghee floats it is unadulterated and if it sinks then the ghee is infused with foreign material.
Salt test: Add a pinch of Hyaluronic acid and tablespoon of salt to two spoons of ghee , after 20 minutes check the color of the ghee. If the ghee has turned red it means it is adulterated.
Iodine test: Add two drops of iodine solution to ghee if it turns purple then the ghee has a presence of starch in it.
How to do a purity check of ginger-garlic paste at homeIt is said that to assess the purity of ginger-garlic paste, one should look for a bright ivory color and the fresh aroma and taste of ginger and garlic. And one should avoid paste with mold, discoloration, slimy texture, or a foul odor, as these are signs of spoilage.
Appearance: Make sure that the paste should have a light color, not be discolored or have any signs of mold or mildew.
Texture: The paste should be smooth and consistent, not slimy.
Smell: A fresh and good paste will have the characteristic aroma of fresh ginger and garlic.
Taste: The paste should taste fresh and pungent, not bitter or stale.
Read Ingredients: While buying packaged ones, make sure to read the ingredients listed on the packaging. A pure paste should primarily contain ginger and garlic, with minimal or no added preservatives or artificial ingredients.
All Images Courtesy: istock ghee adulteration preservatives seizure alleged Hyderabad, Telangana, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant preservatives The pale color of ghee could be indicative of preservatives ginger-garlic paste fkg:hasIngredient ginger pure paste should primarily contain ginger and garlic ginger-garlic paste fkg:hasIngredient garlic pure paste should primarily contain ginger and garlic ginger-garlic paste fkg:hasIngredient ginger A pure paste should primarily contain ginger and garlic banned synthetic food colours fflo:foundAt Processing banned synthetic food colours were also found ghee fflo:hasAdulterant water The burnt smell could be because of the presence of water Palm test fflo:producesIndicator melting instantly if it starts melting instantly then the ghee is pure Water test fflo:producesIndicator ghee floats if the ghee floats it is unadulterated Water test fflo:producesIndicator ghee floats if the ghee floats it is unadulterated Water test fflo:producesIndicator ghee sinks if it sinks then the ghee is infused with foreign material Salt test fflo:producesIndicator ghee turned red If the ghee has turned red it means it is adulterated Iodine test fflo:producesIndicator purple color if it turns purple then the ghee has a presence of starch Iodine test fflo:producesIndicator turns purple if it turns purple then the ghee has a presence of starch in it102:Tc59,Rachakonda food safety raids: 575l of adulterated ghee, over 7000kg of adulterated ginger-garlic paste seized thehindu.com The Rachakonda Police booked 46 cases and arrested 52 people during a special drive against unauthorised and unhygienic food manufacturing units on July 2. The raids were carried out by Special Operations Teams I and II in coordination with Law and Order officers and the Armed Reserve forces of the commissionerate.
Acting on the instructions of Commissioner of Police G. Sudheer Babu, the teams raided several units across LB Nagar, Maheshwaram, Malkajgiri, and Bhongir zones. “Many units were found operating without Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) licences or trade licences. In multiple locations, expired raw materials were being used, banned synthetic food colours were found, and basic hygiene standards were not being followed. Some units were even employing children,” said the officer.
A few manufacturers were also selling products with no manufacturing or expiry dates, and many were supplying adulterated items under counterfeit labels of reputed brands were found.
In LB Nagar, 11 cases were booked and 575 litres of adulterated ghee was seized. In Maheshwaram, 8 cases were booked and 3,946 kilograms of adulterated ginger-garlic paste was seized. In Malkajgiri, 9 cases were booked with seizures including 3,037 kilograms of adulterated ginger-garlic paste and immunity-boosting tablets and powders, including vitamin and protein supplements, all worth ₹10 lakh. In Bhongir, 18 cases were booked. Officials seized 35 kilograms of adulterated paneer and approximately 250 kilograms of adulterated snack mixtures.
Other adulterated food products found during the raids include milk, turmeric powder, coriander powder, sweets, biscuits, bakery items, ice creams and mineral water.
The Commissioner said that the seized food items were being supplied across the Greater Hyderabad Municipal Corporation (GHMC) limits. One of the raided units was manufacturing so-called immunity-boosting tablets and powders, also without proper authorisation.
The Rachakonda Police have appealed to the public to check manufacturing and expiry dates before purchasing any food product, and to report unlicensed or unhygienic food production units via call or WhatsApp at 8712662666. Further investigation is underway to trace the distribution network.
Published - July 03, 2025 08:06 pm IST ghee adulteration adulterated ghee seizure arrest alleged Hyderabad, Ranga Reddy, Telangana, India Adulterated ghee seizure in LB Nagar fflo:inRegion LB Nagar In LB Nagar, 11 cases were booked and 575 litres of adulterated ghee was seized adulterated ginger-garlic paste fflo:foundAt Malkajgiri In Malkajgiri, 9 cases were booked with seizures including 3,037 kilograms of adulterated ginger-garlic paste Rachakonda food safety raids fflo:foundAt Maheshwaram In Maheshwaram, 8 cases were booked adulterated paneer fflo:commonIn Bhongir Officials seized 35 kilograms of adulterated paneer banned synthetic food colours fflo:foundAt unauthorised and unhygienic food manufacturing units banned synthetic food colours were found103:T7fc,Laddu ghee probe: SIT submits status report on investigation to Supreme Court | Vijayawada News - Times of India indiatimes.com Tirupati: The special investigation team (SIT), constituted by the Supreme Court to probe the Tirumala laddu adulteration case, is learnt to have submitted a status report on the ongoing investigation to the apex court a couple of days ago. 
The SIT status report includes information on the progress of the investigation, nature of adulteration, role of the accused, and various petitions filed by the accused in different courts. The SIT has highlighted the obstacles being created during the course of the investigation, including attempts to threaten witnesses and derail the investigation process through legal and other means.
The apex court constituted the SIT on Oct 10 last year, entrusting the probe to a team led by a regional director of CBI, with two members drawn from the state police and the FSSAI. Acting on the court's directions, the SIT launched a comprehensive investigation, during which 14 individuals have been arrested so far. Among those in custody are directors and staff from Bolebaba Dairy, AR Dairy, and Vaishnavi Dairy. 
The SIT found that the ghee supplied by the accused firms was not genuine, but a substance made using chemical-based palm oil derivatives. These findings were included in the remand reports of the arrested individuals and are believed to be detailed further in the sealed report to the Supreme Court. ghee adulteration chemical-based palm oil derivatives investigation arrest alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India chemical-based palm oil derivatives fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee ghee supplied by the accused firms was not genuine, but a substance made using chemical-based palm oil derivatives Tirumala laddu adulteration prov:used laddu Tirumala laddu adulteration case Tirumala laddu fflo:hasAdulterant chemical-based palm oil derivatives ghee supplied by the accused firms was not genuine, but a substance made using chemical-based palm oil derivatives104:Tbf1,CBI opposes grant of bail to accused in ghee case | Vijayawada News - Times of India indiatimes.com Vijayawada: Opposing grant of bail to the accused in the ghee adulteration case, the 
CBI told the high court that adulterated ghee was supplied not only to TTD but also to other temples like Kanipakam, Srikalahasti, Srisailam, Kanaka Durga temple in Vijayawada, Dwaraka Tirumala, and Penuganchiprolu Tirupatamma temples.
CBI standing counsel PSP Suresh Kumar said Bolebaba Dairy directors Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain played a key role in supplying adulterated ghee to these temples. He said in the guise of cow ghee, they supplied palm oil laced with chemicals, which made it look and smell like cow ghee. He further told the court that the Jain brothers earned over 240 crore by supplying 60 lakh kg of spurious ghee to the temples.
Explaining their modus operandi, Suresh Kumar said after getting blacklisted by TTD in 2018, the Jain brothers conspired with AR Dairy and Vaishnavi Dairy. Despite not having the capacity to supply the required ghee to TTD, AR Dairy and Vaishnavi Dairy submitted fake documents prepared by the Jain brothers. After obtaining the supply order in the name of AR and Vaishnavi dairies, Bolebaba supplied ghee to the temples, he stated.
The CBI counsel further submitted that the Jain brothers are threatening witnesses despite being in jail. He said one of the witnesses, Sanjay Jain, was forcefully sent back to Delhi when he arrived in Tirupati to depose before the magistrate. 
He was threatened at Tirupati airport by the henchmen of Jain brothers, and was taken to Chennai and then to Delhi. 
Arguing on behalf of the accused, senior counsels CV Mohan Reddy and S Sriram said the petitioners are in jail for the last four months. As the CBI-led special investigation team (SIT) has already collected all details pertaining to the case and a charge-sheet was also filed, they sought grant of bail to the accused by imposing conditions. Considering the arguments, Justice K Srinivas Reddy reserved judgement in the bail petition filed by Vaishnavi Dairy director Apoorva Chavda. Justice Reddy asked SIT to submit some additional details pertaining to the bail petitions of Jain brothers and posted the matter for further hearing to June 26. ghee adulteration substitution palm oil chemicals bail_opposition charge_sheet_filed alleged Vijayawada, Krishna, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil in the guise of cow ghee, they supplied palm oil laced with chemicals, which made it look and smell like cow ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant chemicals they supplied palm oil laced with chemicals, which made it look and smell like cow ghee palm oil fflo:isSubstituteFor cow ghee in the guise of cow ghee, they supplied palm oil Bolebaba Dairy prov:wasAssociatedWith AR Dairy Jain brothers conspired with AR Dairy and Vaishnavi Dairy palm oil fflo:foundAt Kanipakam temple supplied not only to TTD but also to other temples like Kanipakam palm oil fflo:foundAt Srikalahasti temple supplied palm oil laced with chemicals105:Ta80,Adulterated ghee supplied to TTD, other temples: CBI newindianexpress.com VIJAYAWADA: The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) on Tuesday informed the Andhra Pradesh High Court that adulterated ghee, misrepresented as cow ghee, was supplied to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD), and other major temples, including Kanipakam, Srikalahasti, Srisailam, Vijayawada Kanaka Durga, Dwaraka Tirumala, and Penuganchiprolu Tirupathamma, during the YSRCP regime.
CBI counsel PSP Suresh Kumar revealed that palm oil mixed with chemicals to mimic cow ghee’s colour and aroma was supplied to the temples. The investigation revealed that Bhole Baba Dairy directors Pomil Jain (A3) and Vipin Jain (A4) profited Rs 240 crore by supplying 60 lakh kg of adulterated ghee through AR Dairy and Vaishnavi Dairy.
Despite lacking capacity, these firms secured TTD contracts using forged documents from Bhole Baba Dairy, which was blacklisted in 2018. The CBI alleged that the TTD officials were bribed, and Rs 3 per litre commission was paid to AR and Vaishnavi dairies. Rejected ghee tankers were resupplied after minimal alterations. The CBI reported attempts to intimidate witnesses, including an assault on Sanjay Jain at Tirupati airport, and a fraudulent petition filed in accused Ashish Rohilla’s name.
Justice K Sreenivasa Reddy, who heard the case, reserved verdict on Vaishnavi Dairy CEO Apurva Chavda’s bail plea, and adjourned the hearing on bail petitions of Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain to June 26, directing the Special Investigation Team to submit additional details. ghee adulteration mislabeling palm oil chemicals court_hearing alleged Vijayawada, Andhra Pradesh, India Adulteration of ghee with palm oil and chemicals prov:used ghee palm oil mixed with chemicals to mimic cow ghee’s colour and aroma was supplied to the temples Adulteration of ghee with palm oil and chemicals prov:wasAssociatedWith AR Dairy supplying 60 lakh kg of adulterated ghee through AR Dairy and Vaishnavi Dairy Adulteration of ghee with palm oil and chemicals prov:wasAssociatedWith Vaishnavi Dairy supplying 60 lakh kg of adulterated ghee through AR Dairy and Vaishnavi Dairy ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil palm oil mixed with chemicals to mimic cow ghee's colour and aroma Mixing palm oil with chemicals to mimic cow ghee fflo:hasFraudType Substitution palm oil mixed with chemicals to mimic cow ghee's colour and aroma Misrepresenting palm oil mix as cow ghee fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling adulterated ghee, misrepresented as cow ghee Mixing palm oil with chemicals to mimic cow ghee fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional palm oil mixed with chemicals to mimic cow ghee's colour and aroma was supplied106:Ta97,Coconut oil prices on the boil as retail price soars to ₹410/litre thehindubusinessline.com Coconut oil prices continue to boil with its retail prices reaching ₹410 per litre, up ₹80 in the past week.
Citing declining production of copra as a reason for prices to surge, Thalath Mahmood, president of Cochin Oil Merchant Association (COMA) told businessline
Copra prices also moved northwards to touch ₹231 per kg in Kerala market, while the Tamil Nadu rates stood at ₹227.
Adulteration rears its head
However, he said the Israel-Iran conflict is likely to push up the cost of these edible oils as imports become costlier because of the anticipated hike in freight rates. He alleged that the rising coconut oil price has also led to the availability of inferior and adulterated oils in the market, manufactured by solvent extraction, low-quality and fungus-hit copra in the domestic market.
He also requested the government to take necessary steps to curb the sale of adulterated coconut oil in the market.
The association will soon approach the Centre to lift import restrictions of coconut oil and copra in view of the crisis being faced by the industry due to acute shortage of the raw material.
K.K.Devraj, a consultant in the industry, pointed out that the presence of adulterated coconut was becoming rampant and the recent banning of 42 brands of coconut oil was a welcome step. The shortage of copra and coconuts is likely to push the prices of coconut oil to ₹500 by Onam. But the recent reduction in import duty on crude vegetable oils may control this upward trend, he said.
Raw coconut prices shoot up
Palmolein, which is widely used in Kerala, has started showing a downward trend, and the ripple effect will be there in the coconut oil market as well, especially since the price difference between coconut oil and other vegetable oils will push down coconut oil prices.
It would be healthy for coconut oil prices to come down to reasonable levels since reverse shifting of consumers from sunflower oil and blended oil back to coconut oil may not take place as expected. Ultimately, the coconut oil industry which largely depends on the edible user segment may be the loser in the long run, he said.
Official sources said that raw coconut prices have reached ₹70 per kg due to declining production. Exports of coconut and other value added products are on the rise to cater to the increased demand, thanks to signing of FTA’s.
Published on June 17, 2025 coconut oil adulteration substandard inferior and adulterated oils banning of 42 brands of coconut oil alleged Kerala, India banning of 42 brands of coconut oil fflo:targets coconut oil recent banning of 42 brands of coconut oil107:T12c5,â_x0080__x0098_FSSAI is working towards felicitating whistle-blowers who report adulterationâ_x0080__x0099_ | Ranchi News - The Times of India indiatimes.com In-charge of the state food testing laboratory, Chaturbhuj Meena speaks to Shikha Yadav on their efforts to curb adulteration, the role of lab in detecting unsafe food and the required support to make enforcement more effective and citizen-friendly.
Q: What are the most common adulterants detected by the lab?
A: We've detected a wide range of adulterants. In milk, we frequently find water adulteration, use of milk powder in curd, and starch (arrowroot, refined flour, potato starch) in paneer and khowa. In some samples, milk fat is replaced with cheap oils or vanaspati. Ghee has shown traces of artificial fragrances and non-edible oils. Sweets made from milk products like paneer, chhena, and khowa often contain starch. In mustard oil, we have found cheaper oils mixed with artificial colours and synthetic mustard essence. Fruit-based products like jams, jellies, and drinks sometimes contain starch, modified starches, and sweeteners, with no real fruit content. Pulses such as arhar and masoor are sometimes artificially coloured. Sweets like jalebi, laddoo, and boondi often contain non-edible synthetic dyes like metanil yellow. 
In turmeric, both whole and powdered, lead chromate and rice flour are common adulterants. Red chilli powder often contains coloured stems and dust.
Q. How is food purity tested in the lab?
A. For example, we use the iodine method to test the purity of paneer. Upon finding it adulterated, the next step is to identify if the adulterants are harmful or not. It, however, can be done in a high-end lab. 
Q: Is the current infrastructure and manpower at the food lab adequate?
A: With the addition of junior analysts on an outsourced basis, we are currently training them to build capacity. Once they are fully trained, the manpower should be sufficient for now. However, we need permanent posts to be filled. 
Q: What are the major challenges in ensuring timely detection and reporting of adulterated food samples?
A: Though we are now equipped with modern instruments and trained manpower, our work could improve significantly if the procurement and payment processes for essential materials, like chemicals, consumables, and glassware, were handled directly at the lab level. Day-to-day operations, including NABL-related work, electricity, and water, also require more autonomy and timely budgeting.
Q: How can common citizen directly approach the lab to get a food sample tested?
A: Under Section 40 of the Food Safety and Standards Act, any citizen can have a sample tested. This provision has existed since the 1954 Prevention of Food Adulteration Act. The idea is to empower the public in the fight against adulteration. 
FSSAI is also working towards felicitating whistle-blowers who report adulteration.
Q: What kind of policy or administrative support is needed to boost lab efficiency, faster enforcement, and improve food safety?
A: Currently, one food safety officer is responsible for nearly 50,000 food business operators in each district. We need more officers, better equipment, and vehicles. Most importantly, active support from the police and administrative authorities is crucial. Ideally, sub-divisional magistrates (SDM) should again be given powers as adjudicating officers to enable quicker action. ghee adulteration artificial fragrances suspected Jharkhand, India milk fflo:hasAdulterant water In milk, we frequently find water adulteration curd fflo:hasAdulterant milk powder use of milk powder in curd milk fflo:hasAdulterant cheap oils milk fat is replaced with cheap oils milk fflo:hasAdulterant vanaspati milk fat is replaced with cheap oils or vanaspati ghee fflo:hasAdulterant artificial fragrances Ghee has shown traces of artificial fragrances chhena fflo:hasAdulterant starch Sweets made from milk products like paneer, chhena, and khowa often contain starch mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant artificial colours In mustard oil, we have found cheaper oils mixed with artificial colours turmeric fflo:hasAdulterant lead chromate In turmeric, both whole and powdered, lead chromate and rice flour are common adulterants. turmeric fflo:hasAdulterant rice flour In turmeric, both whole and powdered, lead chromate and rice flour are common adulterants. red chilli powder fflo:hasAdulterant coloured stems Red chilli powder often contains coloured stems and dust. red chilli powder fflo:hasAdulterant dust Red chilli powder often contains coloured stems and dust. paneer fflo:hasAdulterant starch starch ... in paneer and khowa khowa fflo:hasAdulterant starch starch ... in paneer and khowa ghee fflo:hasAdulterant non-edible oils Ghee has shown traces of ... non-edible oils108:Te30,Use of adulterated ghee for preparation raises concerns thehansindia.com Rajamahendravaram: The famed Pootharekulu of Atreyapuram, renowned across the country for their unique taste and delicate preparation, has landed in controversy after authorities discovered the use of substandard ghee in some local sweet shops. The revelations have stirred widespread concern among consumers and locals alike.
According to officials, several vendors have been found using low-quality or adulterated ghee in an attempt to cut costs and boost profits. Recent inspections revealed that ghee samples collected from certain shops failed quality tests, raising alarms about food safety and consumer health.  
On May 22, locals informed authorities after spotting suspicious activity involving the offloading of ghee from an auto-rickshaw at a dry fruits warehouse. Upon inspection, two sacks containing 66 kg of unbranded ghee were seized. An additional 35 kg of ghee was discovered at a related shop and warehouse.  
Revenue and police officials immediately alerted the District Food Control Department. District Food Control Officer P Srikanth stated that samples were sent to the Nacharam Food Laboratory in Hyderabad. The lab results received three days ago confirmed one sample as spoiled and unfit for consumption and the other as substandard.  
Following confirmation of adulteration, authorities issued notices to the shop owner and announced plans to register criminal cases. Officials added that during an earlier raid on February 17, 150 kg of unbranded, unlabelled ghee in loose packing was seized from a raw material supplier. Lab analysis of three samples from that batch revealed adulteration with Dalda (vanaspati) and palm oil.  
Authorities have now issued warnings to local traders that legal action will be taken against those selling unlicensed products, using unbranded ghee, or failing to provide packaging with manufacturing dates. The crackdown is part of a broader initiative to ensure food safety and protect the legacy of Atreyapuram’s iconic sweet.  
Consumers have expressed dismay over the findings, urging for maintenance of high standards traditionally associated with Atreyapuram Pootharekulu. ghee adulteration substandard low-quality ghee vanaspati palm oil seizure notices criminal cases lab_confirmed Rajamahendravaram, East Godavari, Andhra Pradesh, India use of adulterated ghee by vendors prov:wasAssociatedWith vendors vendors have been found using low-quality or adulterated ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod substitution with low-quality ghee using low-quality or adulterated ghee use of substandard ghee fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional in an attempt to cut costs and boost profits ghee samples fflo:collectedAt Retail ghee samples collected from certain shops Analysis of ghee samples fso:isPerformedAt Nacharam Food Laboratory samples were sent to the Nacharam Food Laboratory in Hyderabad substandard ghee finding fflo:foundAtStep Retail 35 kg of ghee was discovered at a related shop substitution with low-quality ghee fflo:hasFraudType Substitution using low-quality or adulterated ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant Dalda adulteration with Dalda (vanaspati) and palm oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil adulteration with Dalda (vanaspati) and palm oil Lab analysis of three samples from that batch revealed adulteration with Dalda (vanaspati) and palm oil fflo:foundAtStep raw material supplier seized from a raw material supplier Adulteration finding in ghee fflo:foundAtStep Retail issued notices to the shop owner ghee fflo:hasAdulterant Dalda adulteration with Dalda (vanaspati) and palm oil109:Tac6,TTD Ghee Case: SIT Likely To Issue Notices To Two Former Officials deccanchronicle.com Advertisement  
TTD ghee case widens: SIT likely to summon ex-officials, Kolkata supplier detained
Tirupati: The investigations into the supply of adulterated  ghee to TTD would progress as the special investigation team plans issuing of notices  to two former officials who held key positions in the temple board. 
Sources said the notices could be issued in phases, beginning with one individual.
SIT questioned Appanna, the personal assistant to former TTD chairman YV Subba Reddy. He appeared before the SIT in Tirupati on Tuesday evening. The questioning was in connection with procurement procedures during Reddy’s tenure, particularly ghee that was later found to be adulterated.
The SIT is trying to understand what internal decisions were made during that time, who handled supplier contracts, and whether any lapses or irregularities occurred.
Appanna is believed to have provided some details that led investigators to investigate the role of two former officials.
Since the SIT probe began in November 2024, it has largely focused on dairy companies and staff directly involved in the supply chain. So far, eight people have been arrested, six from dairies and two TTD employees. Investigation may now include individuals who held decision-making authority in TTD.
In a related development, SIT officials have detained a Kolkata-based businessman named Jyotish, who is alleged to have supplied raw materials used in the adulterated ghee. He is said to be associated with Pomil Jain, director of Bhole Baba Dairy, an accused in the case. Officials say materials were supplied without proper documentation. Jyotish has been brought to Tirupati for questioning.
The SIT is expected to continue questioning throughout the week.
( Source : Deccan Chronicle )
Next Story ghee adulteration detention questioning arrest alleged Tirupati, Andhra Pradesh, India supply of adulterated ghee to TTD fflo:foundIn ghee supply of adulterated ghee to TTD supply of raw materials for adulterated ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith Jyotish Jyotish, who is alleged to have supplied raw materials used in the adulterated ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant adulterated substance ghee that was later found to be adulterated ghee fflo:hasAdulterant adulterant ghee that was later found to be adulterated adulteration of ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith TTD employees six from dairies and two TTD employees Jyotish prov:wasAssociatedWith Pomil Jain associated with Pomil Jain, director of Bhole Baba Dairy supply of raw materials for adulterated ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba Dairy Bhole Baba Dairy, an accused in the case Jyotish fflo:foundAt Kolkata Kolkata-based businessman named Jyotish10a:Tb8c,Special investigation team opposes bail for accused in TTD adulterated ghee supply case | Vijayawada News - Times of India indiatimes.com Vijayawada: The special investigation team (SIT) probing the Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration controversy strongly opposed the granting of bail to the directors of Bolebaba, Vaishnavi, and AR Dairy in the case registered over supply of adulterated ghee to Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD). 
Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), which is leading the SIT constituted by the Supreme Court, told the high court that the accused are highly influential and tried to threaten the witnesses in the case.
The standing counsel for CBI, PSP Suresh Kumar, said a conspiracy was hatched by the accused in the case to obtain ghee supply orders. He stated that although Bolebaba Dairy did not have any agreement for ghee supply, it used AR Dairy as a front to obtain the supply agreement. While the agreement with TTD was made by AR Dairy, it was Bolebaba that supplied the ghee, which was not ghee at all but palm oil mixed with chemicals. All the accused were part of the conspiracy and conducted business worth hundreds of crores, he said.
Suresh Kumar further mentioned that the petitioners threatened a co-accused, Asish Rohilla, in the case when he agreed to depose before the magistrate. They obstructed Asish and shifted him to Chennai, and from there, they sent him to Delhi. 
The SIT gathered evidence for the same and submitted it to the court. Since the accused are financially sound and can influence the witnesses, as in the case of Asish, they should not be granted bail until the completion of the trial.
Suresh Kumar emphasised that it was not a case of adulteration of a chocolate packet but involved the sentiments of crores of devotees. He opposed the granting of bail as the govt is also contemplating setting up a special court for conducting a speedy trial. Considering the gravity of the case, they should not be given bail, he said. The high court posted the matter for further hearing on June 16. MSID:: 121653763 413 | ghee adulteration substitution palm oil chemicals bail opposition alleged Vijayawada, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil not ghee at all but palm oil mixed with chemicals ghee fflo:hasAdulterant chemicals it was Bolebaba that supplied the ghee, which was not ghee at all but palm oil mixed with chemicals palm oil fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee not ghee at all but palm oil supply of adulterated ghee to TTD prov:wasAssociatedWith Bolebaba Dairy Bolebaba that supplied the ghee, which was not ghee at all but palm oil mixed with chemicals TTD ghee adulteration conspiracy prov:wasAssociatedWith Bolebaba Dairy a conspiracy was hatched by the accused ghee substitution with palm oil fflo:hasFraudType Substitution not ghee at all but palm oil mixed with chemicals mixing palm oil with chemicals fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional conspiracy was hatched by the accused10b:T5a1,HC adjourns bail pleas in TTD ghee case to June 17 newindianexpress.com VIJAYAWADA: The High Court adjourned to June 17 the hearing on bail pleas filed in connection with the supply of adulterated ghee to Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) case.
Several accused, including directors of Bhole Baba Dairy, Vaishnavi Dairy, and the managing director of AR Dairy, have sought bail, with the CBI-led SIT having filed a chargesheet. Advocates CV Mohan Reddy and S Sriram, appearing for the petitioners, argued that the accused have been in judicial custody for four months, and with all evidence collected, there is no risk of tampering. Bhole Baba and Vaishnavi Dairies had no direct role in the dairy supply agreement, they said.
However, the CBI counsel contended that Bhole Baba Dairy was central to the scam, and claimed accused intimidated a key witness, accountant Ashish Rohilla, who was allegedly coerced at Tirupati airport and sent back to Delhi. ghee adulteration unspecified chargesheet_filed bail_plea_adjourned alleged Vijayawada, Krishna, Andhra Pradesh, India supply of adulterated ghee to TTD prov:used ghee supply of adulterated ghee supply of adulterated ghee to TTD prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba Dairy Bhole Baba Dairy was central to the scam supply of adulterated ghee to TTD prov:wasAssociatedWith AR Dairy managing director of AR Dairy, have sought bail ghee fflo:hasAdulterant unspecified adulterant adulterated ghee10c:Tca6,Betrayal of devotee faith: SIT opposes bail to accused in Tirupati laddu case indiatoday.in Betrayal of devotee faith: SIT opposes bail to accused in Tirupati laddu case
The Central Bureau of Investigation opposed bail for directors of dairies accused in the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams laddu ghee adulteration case, alleging a multi-crore conspiracy, use of front companies, and witness intimidation in a case tied to religious faith.
The Special Investigation Team (SIT) probing the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) laddu ghee scandal strongly opposed bail for the directors of three dairies accused of supplying adulterated ghee for the famed prasadam.
In a hearing before the Andhra Pradesh High Court, the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), which is heading the SIT, claimed the accused were part of a deep-rooted, multi-crore conspiracy to cheat not just the TTD but crores of devotees. “This is not just food fraud, it is a betrayal of faith,” said PSP Suresh Kumar, standing counsel for the CBI.
The agency alleged that Bholebaba Dairy, which had no formal agreement with TTD, used AR Dairy as a front to secure the ghee supply contract. Though the paperwork was in AR Dairy’s name, it was Bholebaba that actually supplied the product, which, investigators say, was not ghee at all but a harmful mix of palm oil and chemicals.
All three accused dairies, Bholebaba, Vaishnavi, and AR Dairy, were reportedly involved in the scheme, conducting business worth hundreds of crores. The CBI also claimed witness intimidation, saying that co-accused Asish Rohilla, who had agreed to testify, was forcibly moved to Chennai and later to Delhi to stop him from deposing.
The CBI argued that the accused wields significant financial power and could influence other witnesses if granted bail. With the stakes tied not just to legality but to religious sentiment, the agency urged the court to treat the matter with utmost seriousness.
The High Court has reserved its decision on the bail plea until June 16. ghee adulteration substitution palm oil bail_opposition alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil not ghee at all but a harmful mix of palm oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil not ghee at all but a harmful mix of palm oil palm oil fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee not ghee at all but a harmful mix of palm oil Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith AR Dairy AR Dairy as a front to secure the ghee supply contract Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration prov:used ghee supplying adulterated ghee for the famed prasadam ghee fflo:hasAdulterant chemicals harmful mix of palm oil and chemicals Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional multi-crore conspiracy to cheat Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration scheme prov:wasAssociatedWith Bholebaba Dairy All three accused dairies, Bholebaba, Vaishnavi, and AR Dairy, were reportedly involved in the scheme Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration scheme prov:wasAssociatedWith AR Dairy All three accused dairies, Bholebaba, Vaishnavi, and AR Dairy, were reportedly involved in the scheme Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration scheme prov:wasAssociatedWith Asish Rohilla co-accused Asish Rohilla, who had agreed to testify10d:T110d,Tirupati laddu ghee row: HC sets aside suspension of licence of dairy firm | Madurai News - Times of India indiatimes.com Madurai: 
Madras high court on Friday set aside the order passed by the authorities suspending the licence of Dindigul-based 
A R Dairy Food Private Limited for allegedly supplying ghee with foreign fat for preparing laddu in Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam (TTD). The court remitted the matter back to the central licencing authority under the 
Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006, for reconsideration.
The court was hearing a petition filed by A R Dairy Food Private Limited. 
An allegation was made against the company regarding the possible presence of foreign fat other than milk fat in the ghee supplied to TTD. This was initiated by proceedings of the director (Institute of Preventive Medicine), Andhra Pradesh. Show cause notices were issued, and replies were received. Subsequently, the order was passed, and the licence of the petitioner was suspended in full. Challenging the order, the petitioner filed the petition.
Justice V Lakshminarayanan observed that the designated officer suspended the licence concerning all the activities for which it was granted under Section 31 of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. The reason for suspending all the activities for which the licence was granted to the petitioner related only to the supply of misbranded ghee to TTD and the consequent unauthorised and untraceable distribution of the rejected ghee.
The petitioner manufactures several products. Of all those products, ghee alone has put the petitioner on a sticky wicket. The authority had to decide whether the activities of the petitioner were so detrimental to the public that the suspension of all the activities was necessary or whether the suspension of the manufacture of ghee products alone was sufficient. When the Licensing Regulations Act and Regulations call upon the authorities to decide on this issue, failure on their part to consider this aspect necessarily requires the interference of the court, the judge observed.
Hence, the judge set aside the suspension order and remitted the matter back to the licencing authority for reconsideration. The judge directed that the authority shall decide, by way of a reasoned order, whether to suspend the licence of the petitioner for all the activities, or for manufacturing, transportation, and sale of ghee alone. The exercise shall be completed within four weeks. The interim order of the court, which suspended the licence only with respect to ghee, will continue until the authority passes fresh orders.
The judge made it clear that the suspension of the licence is an interim measure that would be in force for six weeks. The same cannot be allowed to operate indefinitely. Within the said period, the designated officer may take a decision on the cancellation of the licence of the petitioner, following the procedure established. Since the petition is allowed on technical grounds, the judge directed the petitioner to pay a cost of 2 lakh to the central licencing authority within two weeks. ghee adulteration foreign fat suspension of licence cost of 2 lakh alleged Madurai, Dindigul, Tamil Nadu, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant foreign fat presence of foreign fat other than milk fat in the ghee foreign fat fflo:isSubstituteFor milk fat foreign fat other than milk fat cost of 2 lakh fflo:issuedBy central licencing authority pay a cost of 2 lakh to the central licencing authority ghee adulteration incident prov:wasAttributedTo A R Dairy Food Private Limited allegedly supplying ghee with foreign fat ghee adulteration incident fflo:foundIn ghee supplying ghee with foreign fat ghee adulteration incident fflo:foundAtStep Distribution supply of misbranded ghee to TTD ghee adulteration incident fflo:triggeredAction suspension of licence order was passed, and the licence of the petitioner was suspended suspension of licence fflo:targets ghee suspension of the manufacture of ghee products alone suspension of licence fflo:targets ghee manufacturing, transportation, and sale of ghee alone suspension of licence fflo:targets ghee manufacturing, transportation, and sale of ghee alone suspension of licence fflo:targets ghee manufacturing, transportation, and sale of ghee alone interim order fflo:targets ghee suspended the licence only with respect to ghee10e:T870,Tirupati Laddoo Ghee Row: Madras HC Quashes Suspension Of FSSAI Licence Of Tamil Nadu Dairy Firm freepressjournal.in Chennai: Months after a row over alleged animal fat being found in the ghee used in the preparation of the laddoo prasadam at the famed Tirupati shrine made headlines, the Madras High Court on Friday set aside the suspension of the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) licence of a Tamil Nadu-based dairy company that supplied the ghee to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam.
A R Dairy Food Private Limited, based in Dindigul in south Tamil Nadu, had filed a petition challenging the suspension of its licence.
Allowing the petition, Justice Lakshminarayan remitted the matter to the licensing authority to consider whether the suspension should apply only to the ghee manufactured at the plant or to all dairy products of the company. The judge directed the FSSAI authorities to conduct fresh proceedings within four weeks.
According to the judge, until such reconsideration is complete, the suspension of the licence shall apply only to the manufacture of ghee. Additionally, he noted that a licence suspension could remain in force only for a maximum of six weeks and not indefinitely.
The court observed that if the FSSAI authorities intend to bar the company from manufacturing food products after confirming that the ghee supplied to Tirupati was adulterated, the appropriate course would be to cancel the licence by following due legal procedures. ghee adulteration animal fat suspension of FSSAI licence alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat alleged animal fat being found in the ghee suspension of FSSAI licence fflo:issuedBy FSSAI suspension of the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) licence ghee fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy dairy company that supplied the ghee suspension quashing order fflo:issuedBy Madras High Court Madras High Court on Friday set aside the suspension of the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) licence suspension of FSSAI licence fflo:targets ghee suspension should apply only to the ghee manufactured at the plant10f:Tdfb,Tirupati laddu row: Madras High Court sets aside suspension of FSSAI licence of Dindigul-based A.R. Dairy Food thehindu.com The Madras High Court on Friday (May 16, 2025) set aside the suspension of the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) licence issued to Dindigul-based A.R. Dairy Food Private Limited for having allegedly supplied ghee with foreign fat, instead of milk fat, to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam (TTD) for preparing the laddu prasadam.
Justice V. Lakshminarayanan allowed a writ petition filed by A.R. Dairy Food Private Limited, challenging the suspension order passed by the central licensing authority, under the Food Safety and Standards Act of 2006, on February 14, 2025. He also remitted the matter to the licensing authority for reconsideration.
The judge made it clear that the authority must consider whether the licence must be suspended with respect to the production of ghee alone or also with respect to other products too. He also ordered that fresh proceedings be issued within four weeks after reconsidering the matter in accordance with his directions.
Justice Lakshminarayanan stated that the licence shall be considered to have been suspended only with respect to the manufacture of ghee, until the licensing authority reconsiders the matter and issues fresh proceedings. The judge further observed that suspension of licence could be in force for a maximum period of six weeks and not indefinitely.
If the licensing authority wanted to prevent the petitioner company from making any food products permanently, after arriving at a conclusion that it had indeed adulterated the ghee supplied to TTD, then the only option available would be to cancel the FSSAI licence by following due procedures of law, he added.
Since the writ petition had been allowed on a technical ground, the judge directed the petitioner company to pay costs of ₹2 lakh to the central licensing authority within two weeks. The orders were reserved in the Madurai Bench of the Madras High Court on April 2, 2025, but delivered at the principal seat of the High Court in Chennai.
In its affidavit, the dairy company had claimed to have been procuring milk from 13,000 suppliers every day by employing 400 staff members. The sudden suspension of the licence preventing the dairy from manufacturing any milk product, and not just ghee, had come as a shocker to all those dependent on the company, it said.
It also argued that the licensing authority had initially issued an improvement notice under Section 32 of the 2006 Act but abandoned those proceedings midway and instead suspended the FSSAI licence by invoking the ground of public interest.
Published - May 16, 2025 03:26 pm IST ghee adulteration foreign fat suspension of FSSAI licence alleged Dindigul, Tamil Nadu, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant foreign fat supplied ghee with foreign fat, instead of milk fat foreign fat fflo:isSubstituteFor milk fat foreign fat, instead of milk fat ghee adulteration incident prov:wasAttributedTo A.R. Dairy Food Private Limited allegedly supplied ghee with foreign fat, instead of milk fat ghee adulteration incident fflo:triggeredAction suspension of FSSAI licence suspension of the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) licence suspension of FSSAI licence fflo:targets ghee suspended only with respect to the manufacture of ghee suspension of FSSAI licence fflo:issuedBy central licensing authority suspension order passed by the central licensing authority ghee fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy manufacturing any milk product, and not just ghee110:Td8b,AMC seizes 105 tins of suspicious cooking oil from Behrampura - The Times of India indiatimes.com Ahmedabad: On Friday, the health department of the Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation (AMC) conducted a raid at the packaging unit of Milan Oils Pvt Ltd, located near Chandola Lake in the Behrampura area of the city. The health department collected samples of refined palm oil (Gujarat brand) and refined soybean oil (Ananta brand) from the packaged tins and sent them to a food laboratory for testing. 
Due to suspicions about the cooking oil, 105 tins, comprising 90 tins of refined palm oil (Gujarat brand) and 15 tins of refined soybean oil (Ananta brand), were seized. These tins will remain confiscated until the test results of the samples from these two brands are received.
Additionally, between April 15 and 26, the department inspected 916 units across various areas of the city, issuing notices to 349 units for violations of regulations. They destroyed 529 kilograms of inedible food and 608 litres of inedible liquid. 
A total of 195 TPC tests were conducted. On April 16, an inspection at a vegetable chutney manufacturing unit in the Bapunagar area found unhygienic conditions, leading to the sealing of the facility. 
On the same day, a complaint was received about an insect found in a dish served to a customer at Shashwat Hospitality (TSF) on the Iskcon-Ambli Road in the Jodhpur area, prompting the sealing of the restaurant due to unhygienic conditions.
From April 15 to 26, the health department conducted inspections in various areas of the city, collecting 163 food samples. These included 11 samples of milk products, 4 bakery product samples, 36 samples of gram flour sweets, 19 samples of mango juice and other beverages, 5 samples of cold drinks, 5 samples of cooking oil, 14 spice samples, and 69 samples of other food items, all sent to a food laboratory for testing.
On Saturday, the health department announced the results of food samples taken from three different units in the city. The sample of malai paneer from Baba Deep Singh Restaurant on Naroda-Dehgam Road was declared unsafe. Meanwhile, the strawberry ice cream sample from Yashvi Beverages in Paldi and the refined palm oil sample from Milan Oil Depot in Jamalpur were declared substandard.
While the health department conducts inspections in various units across Ahmedabad city, samples of packaged snacks are not taken. Additionally, samples of various well-known ice creams or branded cold drinks are not collected. Although the sale of branded ice creams and cold drinks increases during the summer, their samples are not regularly taken. refined palm oil refined soybean oil substandard seizure suspected Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India Sealing of vegetable chutney unit fflo:targets vegetable chutney inspection at a vegetable chutney manufacturing unit Seizure of 105 tins fflo:targets refined soybean oil 15 tins of refined soybean oil (Ananta brand), were seized Sealing of vegetable chutney unit fflo:issuedBy Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation leading to the sealing of the facility milk products sample fflo:collectedAt Retail collecting 163 food samples. These included 11 samples of milk products bakery product sample fflo:collectedAt Retail 4 bakery product samples gram flour sweets sample fflo:collectedAt Retail 36 samples of gram flour sweets malai paneer fflo:hasAdulterant unsafe condition sample of malai paneer from Baba Deep Singh Restaurant was declared unsafe111:T79f,Factory making spurious ghee busted in Chittor, one detained - The Times of India indiatimes.com Bhilwara: Chittorgarh police Friday seized 1,500 kg of fake desi ghee laced with animal fat, palm oil, and synthetic essenceâan adulteration racket running for over 18 months. The factory operator, Bhairulal Gurjar of Rajsamand, was detained.
Acting on a tip-off, a special team led by deputy SP Vinay Chaudhary raided a warehouse in Chittodi Kheda village. Gurjar had registered a GST firm under the name "Dev Milk" and was churning out counterfeit ghee under the brands "Kritagya" and "Om Gau Darshan," distributing mainly in Madhya Pradesh and beyond.
Police recovered 15 quintals of fake ghee, 1,200 kg of vegetable ghee, 1.5 quintals of palm oil, 4 quintals of vegetable oil, animal fat, essence, and processing equipment.
The fake ghee, masked with strong essence, was designed to pass undetected by smell. Shockingly, police also found two child labourers working in the unit. SP Sudhir Joshi said the crackdown was part of a district-wide push against illegal operations. "No compromise on public health," he added, vowing strict action. A case has been registered and further investigation is underway. ghee adulteration animal fat palm oil synthetic essence seizure detention case registration alleged Chittor, Chittorgarh, Rajasthan, India desi ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat fake desi ghee laced with animal fat desi ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil fake desi ghee laced with animal fat, palm oil desi ghee fflo:hasAdulterant synthetic essence fake desi ghee laced with animal fat, palm oil, and synthetic essence Adulteration of desi ghee in Chittor prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhairulal Gurjar The factory operator, Bhairulal Gurjar of Rajsamand, was detained. Adulteration of desi ghee in Chittor prov:used desi ghee seized 1,500 kg of fake desi ghee Masking with essence fflo:hasFraudType Masking The fake ghee, masked with strong essence112:T1783,Health dept seizes 352 boxes of refined oil after 6 hospitalised hindustantimes.com Health dept seizes 352 boxes of refined oil after 6 hospitalised
Test results show Vitamin D toxicity in patients who hail from 2 Rajpura villages; according to the communication of the PGIMER, Chandigarh, with the Patiala health department, preliminary analysis of an oil sample linked to the cases has revealed abnormally high levels of Vitamin D.
Six people from two villages near Rajpura town were rushed to the PGIMER, Chandigarh, in critical condition last week after they consumed refined soyabean oil with high levels of Vitamin D, supporting the hypothesis of a shared source of Vitamin D toxicity.
The six patients, including two children, were admitted to the PGIMER, Chandigarh, after experiencing acute symptoms of vomiting and weakness. During their treatment, the PGIMER alerted the Patiala health department that all the six patients fell ill due to hypervitaminosis D, known as vitamin D toxicity.
According to the communication of the PGIMER, Chandigarh, with the Patiala health department, preliminary analysis of an oil sample linked to the cases has revealed abnormally high levels of Vitamin D.
Hypervitaminosis D is an acute medical condition that is caused by consuming excessive amounts of vitamin D, leading to dangerously high blood calcium levels (hypercalcemia). This can damage kidneys, bones, and soft tissues over time.
Patiala health department officials said on Monday that the affected patients, two children from Alluna and four adults from Bhedwal village near Rajpura town in Patiala district, were admitted to the PGIMER last week.
They had consumed ‘Binni’ refined oil purchased from a karyana store in Bhedwal village, they said.
Dr Divjot Singh, district epidemiologist, said, “Public announcements have been made in villages to stop using the refined oil of Binni brand. Our health workers in the area are on alert. We have not detected any other cases so far.”
Health officials said that the refined oil reportedly had a high level of vitamin D, adding that the karyana store owner claimed that he had received packaged oil from Rajpura town.
Officials said that a survey had already been conducted in both the villages, but no other case had been detected there.
Meanwhile, the food wing of the Patiala health department also swung into action and collected samples of the ‘Binni’ refined oil.
Dr Gurpreet Kaur, district health officer, said, “We have already confiscated 352 boxes and 13 bottles of the refined oil. We have removed the harmful product from circulation. Samples of the seized products have been collected and sent for laboratory analysis to the state food lab in Kharar. Legal steps will be taken in accordance with the food safety laws once the investigation concludes.”
- Karam Prakash is a Patiala-based senior correspondent covering several districts of Malwa region of Punjab. He writes on various domains, including health, agriculture, power and education. refined soyabean oil Binni refined oil adulteration contamination Vitamin D confiscation public announcement suspected Rajpura, Patiala, Punjab, India refined soyabean oil fflo:hasAdulterant Vitamin D consumed refined soyabean oil with high levels of Vitamin D Vitamin D fflo:causesEffect hypervitaminosis D patients fell ill due to hypervitaminosis D, known as vitamin D toxicity abnormally high levels of Vitamin D fso:isResultOf preliminary analysis of an oil sample preliminary analysis of an oil sample linked to the cases has revealed abnormally high levels of Vitamin D preliminary analysis of an oil sample fflo:identifies Vitamin D preliminary analysis of an oil sample linked to the cases has revealed abnormally high levels of Vitamin D Vitamin D fflo:causesEffect Hypervitaminosis D Hypervitaminosis D is an acute medical condition that is caused by consuming excessive amounts of vitamin D confiscation of 352 boxes and 13 bottles of refined oil fflo:targets refined oil confiscated 352 boxes and 13 bottles of the refined oil hypervitaminosis D fflo:hasEffectType fflo:AcuteEffect experiencing acute symptoms of vomiting and weakness preliminary analysis of an oil sample fso:isPerformedAt PGIMER, Chandigarh preliminary analysis of an oil sample linked to the cases has revealed preliminary analysis of an oil sample fso:isPerformedOn refined soyabean oil preliminary analysis of an oil sample linked to the cases Vitamin D fflo:detectedBy fflo:LaboratoryTest preliminary analysis of an oil sample linked to the cases has revealed Hypervitaminosis D fflo:hasEffectType fflo:AcuteEffect Hypervitaminosis D is an acute medical condition Hypervitaminosis D fflo:causesEffect hypercalcemia leading to dangerously high blood calcium levels (hypercalcemia) Hypervitaminosis D fflo:causesEffect kidney damage This can damage kidneys, bones, and soft tissues over time Hypervitaminosis D fflo:causesEffect bone damage This can damage kidneys, bones, and soft tissues over time Hypervitaminosis D fflo:causesEffect soft tissue damage This can damage kidneys, bones, and soft tissues over time Binni refined oil fflo:hasAdulterant Vitamin D the refined oil reportedly had a high level of vitamin D vitamin D fflo:foundAt Retail purchased from a karyana store in Bhedwal village Hypervitaminosis D incident in Patiala fflo:inRegion Alluna two children from Alluna confiscation of 352 boxes and 13 bottles of refined oil fflo:issuedBy Patiala health department We have already confiscated 352 boxes and 13 bottles of the refined oil. laboratory analysis of seized refined oil samples fso:isPerformedAt state food lab in Kharar sent for laboratory analysis to the state food lab in Kharar laboratory analysis fso:isPerformedOn seized refined oil samples Samples of the seized products have been collected and sent for laboratory analysis legal steps in accordance with food safety laws fflo:issuedBy Patiala health department Legal steps will be taken in accordance with the food safety laws113:Tc01,Tirupati Prasad Case: Four Gwalior Traders Under Investigation By CBI For Supplying Ghee Mixed With Animal Fat freepressjournal.in Gwalior (Madhya Pradesh): Four traders from Gwalior have come under the scanner of the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) in connection with the alleged use of animal fat in the prasad served at the famous Tirupati Balaji Temple.
The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) team probing the adulteration of prasad at the famous Tirupati Balaji Temple has reached Gwalior on Sunday.
The team suspects that some of the ghee and oil used in the prasad—allegedly mixed with animal fat—was supplied by traders based in Gwalior’s Dal Bazaar area.
A four-member CBI and SIT team from South India arrived in the city two days ago. Their first stop was the Dal Bazaar, a hub of ghee and oil businesses. As soon as word spread about the investigation, panic set in. Some traders shut their shops, while others went missing.
The CBI served notices to several traders, asking them to appear for questioning. When some did not respond, the agency contacted Inderganj police for help. With assistance from CSP Robin Jain and Kotwali police station in-charge Mohini Mishra, the traders were brought in for questioning.
The CBI and SIT have been in Gwalior for two days. They are said to be focusing on a few specific traders, including Nitin Agarwal alias Monu from CP Trading Company in Maina Wali Gali, and businessmen Mohit Agarwal, Ajit Kumar, and Rakesh Kumar. All of them are involved in the ghee and oil business.
On the first day, the CBI served notices to these traders, but many of them disappeared and did not show up due to fear. After that, the CBI team contacted CSP Robin Jain and Kotwali police station in-charge Mohini Mishra for assistance. With police help, the traders were brought in for questioning.
According to sources, the CBI is likely to stay in Gwalior for another two to three days. Some individuals may be taken for further questioning. The case, which started in South India, has now expanded into North India, with Gwalior emerging as a key link in the supply chain of adulterated products used in temple offerings. ghee oil adulteration animal fat investigation questioning alleged Gwalior, Madhya Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat ghee and oil used in the prasad—allegedly mixed with animal fat oil fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat ghee and oil used in the prasad—allegedly mixed with animal fat ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat ghee and oil used in the prasad—allegedly mixed with animal fat Tirupati Prasad Adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Gwalior traders Four traders from Gwalior have come under the scanner of the Central Bureau of Investigation Tirupati Prasad Adulteration prov:used oil ghee and oil used in the prasad Tirupati Prasad Adulteration Act prov:wasAssociatedWith Nitin Agarwal focusing on a few specific traders, including Nitin Agarwal alias Monu Tirupati Prasad Adulteration Act prov:wasAssociatedWith Mohit Agarwal businessmen Mohit Agarwal, Ajit Kumar, and Rakesh Kumar114:Tc4c,1,300kg of cream seized, unit sealed | Ahmedabad News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Ahmedabad: An AMC team on Saturday raided a warehouse-cum-factory, Shivshambhu Dairy Products, on Naroda Road and seized 1,300kg of cream valued at Rs 3.90 lakh. It was suspected that palm oil and vegetable ghee were being mixed with pure cream to produce low-quality ghee. The unit was seized. 
Additionally, 144kg of suspicious paneer was seized from Satnam Dairy Products in Nikol village, and 119kg from a paneer warehouse in Vastral.
Between March 23 and 29, the civic body inspected 454 food units across the city, issuing notices to 184 units for unhygienic conditions. A total of 386kg of inedible food and 372kg of inedible liquid were destroyed. In all, 145 TPC tests were conducted, and 209 food samples were collected from various units for laboratory testing. Eight units were sealed due to unhygienic conditions and lack of licences.
Dr Bhavin Joshi, additional health officer of the Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation, said, "In Naroda, over a 1,000 kilograms of suspicious cream were seized from a newly established factory. In this case, milk powder, palm oil, and other types of vegetable ghee were added to increase the quantity. Such adulteration can harm health. Samples have been collected for further investigation." The corporation collects food samples from various units, and cases are filed against those with non-compliant samples before the executing officer. 
From 2011 to 2025, a total of 2,240 cases were filed, with 242 resolved, resulting in fines of Rs 77.62 lakh. From Jan to March 2025, 44 cases were filed, none resolved. In 2024, 71 cases were filed, none resolved. In 2023, 65 cases were filed, with one resolved, resulting in a Rs 1.50 lakh fine. Currently, 1,998 cases are pending. cream vegetable ghee adulteration palm oil vegetable ghee seizure unit sealed suspected Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India cream fflo:hasAdulterationMethod mixing palm oil and vegetable ghee with cream palm oil and vegetable ghee were being mixed with pure cream 209 food samples fflo:collectedAt various units 209 food samples were collected from various units mixing palm oil and vegetable ghee with cream prov:wasAssociatedWith Shivshambhu Dairy Products suspected that palm oil and vegetable ghee were being mixed with pure cream milk powder prov:wasGeneratedBy cream adulteration at Shivshambhu Dairy Products milk powder, palm oil, and other types of vegetable ghee were added mixing palm oil and vegetable ghee with cream fflo:hasFraudType Dilution added to increase the quantity seizure of 144kg of suspicious paneer fflo:issuedBy Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation 144kg of suspicious paneer was seized from Satnam Dairy Products seizure of 119kg of paneer fflo:issuedBy Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation 119kg from a paneer warehouse in Vastral sealing of 8 units fflo:issuedBy Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation Eight units were sealed due to unhygienic conditions laboratory testing fso:isPerformedOn 209 food samples collected from various units for laboratory testing palm oil fflo:causesEffect health harm Such adulteration can harm health115:T13f5,Fake Ghee: 3,100 kg adulterated ghee seized in Ahmedabad: 7 ways to identify fake ghee at home | - The Times of India indiatimes.com Ghee, also known as clarified butter, is an Ayurveda-approved food item, which is highly valued for its medicinal properties, and is believed to promote digestion, boost immunity, and nourish the skin and hair. But, what if the ghee you are using is made with vegetable fat, fatty acid mono, and diglycerides and can lead to major health issues? As per latest news reports, the Gujarat Food and Drug Control Administration (FDCA) has taken action against a trader involved in ghee adulteration and seized 3,100 kg of ghee during a raid at Shri Kshem Kalyani Milk and Milk Products in Kheda district.
As per reports, During the raid, officials collected three samples and seized 3,100 kg of adulterated products worth Rs 8.75 lakh. Gujarat FDCA commissioner has mentioned that during the raid they seized 1500 kg of ghee, 1600 kg of butter and oil, and 1 liter of ghee flavouring. The FDCA has suspended the firm's FSSAI license with immediate effect to prevent further adulteration activities and has imposed a fine of Rs 2 lakh on the trader.
While adulteration of ghee and other edible items has become quite common, it is important for the masses to take extra care while buying foods. 
Here are a few tips and tricks one can follow while buying ghee and identify fake ghee.
Appearance and texture: Traditionally, ghee in its purest form has a golden color, rich and creamy texture. When held against light it should appear translucent and clear. The pale color of ghee could be indicative of preservatives and one should avoid it.
Packaging and label: It is important to pay special attention to the packaging and label of ghee products. A genuine ghee brand will have all major certificates of regulation compliances on it. The license number, date of packaging, expiry should be thoroughly checked before buying ghee.
Aroma and flavor: Naturally, ghee has a nutty flavor and a smooth consistency. The ghee should never smell burnt as it has a high heating point. The burnt smell could be because of the presence of water or addons. Hence, such ghee should be avoided at all costs.
While one can judge the ghee using the above-mentioned criteria before buying it, there are also other ways by which you can ensure that the ghee you are consuming is beneficial.
Palm test: Simply, pour frozen ghee on your palm and if it starts melting instantly then the ghee is pure. Else, it is not and such ghee should be avoided.
Water test: Fill a glass of normal water at room temperature, add ghee to it, if the ghee floats it is unadulterated and if it sinks then the ghee is infused with foreign material.
Salt test: Add a pinch of Hyaluronic acid and tablespoon of salt to two spoons of ghee , after 20 minutes check the color of the ghee. If the ghee has turned red it means it is adulterated.
Iodine test: Add two drops of iodine solution to ghee if it turns purple then the ghee has a presence of starch in it.
Thumb and Embed Images Courtesy: istock ghee adulteration seizure pending_test India, Ahmedabad ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable fat ghee you are using is made with vegetable fat genuine ghee brand fflo:compliesWith regulation compliances A genuine ghee brand will have all major certificates of regulation compliances Gujarat FDCA seizure of adulterated ghee fflo:foundAtStep Processing raid at Shri Kshem Kalyani Milk and Milk Products suspension of FSSAI license fflo:issuedBy Gujarat Food and Drug Control Administration FDCA has suspended the firm's FSSAI license fine of Rs 2 lakh fflo:issuedBy Gujarat Food and Drug Control Administration imposed a fine of Rs 2 lakh on the trader ghee adulteration finding fflo:triggeredAction license suspension action FDCA has suspended the firm's FSSAI license with immediate effect ghee adulteration finding fflo:triggeredAction fine of Rs 2 lakh imposed a fine of Rs 2 lakh on the trader burnt smell fflo:identifies water The burnt smell could be because of the presence of water Palm test fflo:producesIndicator melting instantly indicates pure ghee pour frozen ghee on your palm and if it starts melting instantly then the ghee is pure Palm test fflo:producesIndicator not melting instantly indicates adulterated ghee if it starts melting instantly then the ghee is pure. Else, it is not Water test fflo:producesIndicator floating indicates unadulterated ghee if the ghee floats it is unadulterated Water test fflo:producesIndicator sinking indicates ghee infused with foreign material if it sinks then the ghee is infused with foreign material Salt test fflo:producesIndicator turning red indicates adulterated ghee If the ghee has turned red it means it is adulterated Iodine test fflo:producesIndicator turning purple indicates presence of starch if it turns purple then the ghee has a presence of starch in it starch fflo:detectedBy Iodine test if it turns purple then the ghee has a presence of starch in it foreign material fflo:detectedBy Water test if it sinks then the ghee is infused with foreign material116:T7da,Fake oil found in Bihar, here's how to spot it. indiatoday.in A cordial exchange between Russian President Vladimir Putin and American architect Rodney Cook Jr. at the St. Petersburg International Economic Forum highlighted cultural ties amid broader US-Russia tensions. Speaking during a session moderated by Geeta Mohan, Cook said St. Petersburg’s famed ballrooms, cathedrals and palaces had long influenced his architectural work, including the planned White House ballroom project.
Fake oil found in Bihar, here's how to spot it.
Fake oil containers were seized in Rohtas district, Bihar. Watch to know how to spot the difference between real and fake oil.
OTHER VIDEOS FROM Mo.Of.Everything
Russian President Vladimir Putin underscored the enduring strategic partnership between Russia and India during a discussion on military and technical cooperation at the St. Petersburg International Economic Forum (SPIEF). He noted that a substantial share of India's military equipment is of Russian origin, reflecting decades of close defence collaboration. Emphasising the trust between the two nations, Putin said their relationship extends beyond simple trade and arms sales. He cited the BrahMos supersonic missile as a successful example of joint research and development. Putin also revealed that Russia remains willing to sell its Su-57 fighter jet to India, despite an earlier joint development programme not materialising.
Russian President Vladimir Putin hailed Prime Minister Narendra Modi's leadership and said under his leadership any threats of sanctions would boomerang.
Watch as Russian President Vladimir Putin responds to this and more at the St Petersburg International Economic Forum (SPIEF), which was moderated by India Today's Foreign Affairs Editor Geeta Mohan on Friday. edible oil counterfeit substandard seizure suspected Rohtas district, Bihar, India Fake oil seizure in Rohtas district fflo:inRegion Rohtas district, Bihar Fake oil containers were seized in Rohtas district, Bihar.117:T126f,Crackdown on food adulteration: 112 kg rice bran oil destroyed, substandard sauces seized in Lucknow hindustantimes.com Crackdown on food adulteration: 112 kg rice bran oil destroyed, substandard sauces seized in Lucknow
Upon examination, the FSDA team found that the vegetable and soy sauces were adulterated with potato pulp; samples sent for analysis
LUCKNOW The Food Safety and Drug Administration (FSDA) conducted multiple raids across the city on Tuesday and Monday, seizing large quantities of substandard and adulterated food items as part of a crackdown on illegal food practices that compromise public health.
On Tuesday, FSDA’s vigilance led to the seizure of 112kg of rice bran oil that was being manufactured under unhygienic conditions at a unit on TS Mishra Road, near Kakori. The oil, which was intended for sale, was found stored in filthy conditions, prompting the team to confiscate and destroy it immediately. Officials also seized various food items, including cookies, milk, paneer, sabudana papad, kachari, khoya, and mustard oil from multiple establishments across the city.
“A total of 112kg rice bran oil, meant for sale, was stored in filthy conditions, which is why it was seized. We are also conducting searches to ensure that no other stock of this oil has been dumped into the market,” said assistant commissioner (food) Vijay Pratap Singh.
On Monday, another team from FSDA raided a firm in Mahona, Bakshi Ka Talab, uncovering a large-scale adulteration operation. Officials found adulterated and substandard vegetable and soy sauces being produced and stored in poor conditions. A substantial stock of these sauces, along with large quantities of ‘Taza Brand’ salt, was seized. The FSDA team halted operations and issued a notice to the owner of the firm. Samples of the adulterated sauces and salt were sent for analysis.
Singh said the raid also revealed 44 tins of inferior and adulterated jaggery syrup, which were seized. Upon examination, the FSDA team found that the vegetable and soy sauces were adulterated with potato pulp. As a result, 130 cans of vegetable sauce worth ₹13,000 and 13 cans of soy sauce worth ₹1,500 were confiscated. The raid also saw the seizure of 20 bags of substandard ‘Taza Brand’ salt, valued at around ₹10,000.
The FSDA collected 30 samples from this raid, all of which were sent for laboratory testing.
The agency has deployed six teams to conduct surprise inspections across markets in the city. Since March 7, they have been working to inspect food items in various markets, including khoya markets in Charbagh and Thakurganj. Over 220 samples have been collected from different establishments across the city in just five days of the crackdown. These samples are currently being tested in laboratories to determine their quality and safety for public consumption.
In a related operation, the FSDA also targeted several dairies manufacturing paneer and khoya, resulting in the destruction of around 40kg of paneer in Rajajipuram that was found to be unfit for consumption on Tuesday. rice bran oil substandard unsafe_food seizure destruction alleged Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India vegetable sauce fflo:hasAdulterant potato pulp vegetable and soy sauces were adulterated with potato pulp soy sauce fflo:hasAdulterant potato pulp vegetable and soy sauces were adulterated with potato pulp vegetable sauce fflo:hasAdulterationMethod addition of potato pulp adulterated with potato pulp vegetable sauce fflo:hasAdulterant potato pulp vegetable and soy sauces were adulterated with potato pulp soy sauce fflo:hasAdulterant potato pulp vegetable and soy sauces were adulterated with potato pulp soy sauce fflo:hasAdulterant potato pulp vegetable and soy sauces were adulterated with potato pulp notice to the owner of the firm fflo:issuedBy FSDA issued a notice to the owner of the firm paneer unfit finding fflo:foundAtStep Processing paneer in Rajajipuram that was found to be unfit for consumption paneer unfit finding fflo:foundAtStep Processing paneer in Rajajipuram that was found to be unfit paneer unfit finding fflo:foundAtStep Processing paneer in Rajajipuram that was found to be unfit paneer unfit finding fflo:foundAtStep Processing paneer in Rajajipuram that was found to be unfit for consumption paneer unfit for consumption finding fflo:foundAtStep Processing dairies manufacturing paneer and khoya paneer unfit finding fflo:foundAtStep fflo:Processing dairies manufacturing paneer and khoya paneer unfit finding fflo:foundAtStep Processing paneer in Rajajipuram that was found to be unfit for consumption paneer unfit finding fflo:foundAtStep Processing paneer in Rajajipuram that was found to be unfit for consumption118:T7bd,Shop owner held for selling expired edible oils with tampered labels siasat.com Hyderabad: A 51-year-old man was arrested by the Hyderabad police and the food safety officials for allegedly repacking and selling expired edible oils with altered labels.
The accused has been identified as Ashok Kumar Agarwal, resident of Kachiguda.
During the raid at Sri Ganesh Balaji Lakkadatar Oil at Sri Krupa Market, Malakpet, officials seized 1,014 litres of edible oil worth Rs 1.90 lakh. The accused was found using whiteners to erase expiry dates and batch numbers on packaging, despite lacking a repacking license.
Seized items included 39 bottles (5 litres each) and 27 bottles (2 litres each) of Fresh Heart brand oil with tampered expiry dates, along with 51 tins (15 litres each), some of which had no date stickers.
According to reports, the accused was purchasing oils in bulk, repacking them with falsified labels, and selling them for profit.
The confiscated stock and the accused were handed over to the Food Safety Officer, GHMC Malakpet, for legal action.
Further investigation is ongoing. edible oil Fresh Heart brand oil substandard mislabeling counterfeit arrest seizure legal action alleged Hyderabad, Telangana, India repacking and selling expired edible oils with altered labels prov:used edible oil repacking and selling expired edible oils Fresh Heart brand oil fflo:belongsToCategory Oils Fresh Heart brand oil repacking and selling expired edible oils with altered labels fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling selling expired edible oils with altered labels repacking and selling expired edible oils with altered labels fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional using whiteners to erase expiry dates and batch numbers edible oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod erasing expiry dates and batch numbers using whiteners to erase expiry dates and batch numbers on packaging erasing expiry dates and batch numbers fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling erase expiry dates and batch numbers on packaging119:T8cd,Edible oil racket busted, 1 arrested in joint drive thehansindia.com Hyderabad: The Hyderabad Commissioner’s Task Force, South-East Team, along with the Food Safety Officials, raided a shop in Mahaboob Mansion, Malakpet, and apprehended a person for repacking and selling edible oils with expired labels and using whitener on labels to suppress the expiry date and batch numbers without a repacking license. The police seized expired products worth Rs 1.9 lakh.
The arrested person was identified as Ashok Kumar Agarwal (51), owner of Sri Ganesh Balaji Lakkadatar Oil. The police seized 161 bottles and 31 tins, 1,014 litres of oil.  
According to the police, on Monday, the Task Force team, along with the Food Safety officials, raided Sri Ganesh Balaji Lakkadatar Oil in Sri Krupa Market. A thorough inquiry revealed that Agarwal was purchasing edible oils in bulk and repacking them without a repacking license. He concealed the expiry date and batch numbers on labels by using whiteners and supplying oil to needy customers and gaining profits illegally. The officials seized 1,014 litres of oil worth Rs 1.9 lakh. He, along with seized material, was handed over to FSO, GHMC, Circle-VI, Malakpet, for further action. edible oil mislabeling substandard unsafe_food raid arrest seizure alleged Hyderabad, Telangana, India repacking edible oils without license prov:used edible oil repacking and selling edible oils with expired labels and using whitener on labels to suppress the expiry date and batch numbers without a repacking license repacking edible oils without license prov:wasAssociatedWith Ashok Kumar Agarwal Agarwal was purchasing edible oils in bulk and repacking them without a repacking license using whitener on labels to suppress expiry date fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling using whitener on labels to suppress the expiry date and batch numbers Ashok Kumar Agarwal prov:wasAssociatedWith repacking and selling edible oils with expired labels apprehended a person for repacking and selling edible oils with expired labels seized expired products fflo:foundAtStep Retail raided a shop in Mahaboob Mansion, Malakpet using whitener on labels fflo:hasFraudType Masking using whitener on labels to suppress the expiry date and batch numbers11a:T179b,Shop owner held for selling expired edible oils with tampered labels in Hyderabad etemaaddaily.com Urdu
Matrimonials
Classifieds
مزید دریافت کریں
Geographic Reference
City & Local Guides
مزید دریافت کریں
City & Local Guides
Geographic Reference
World
Business
Sports
Entertainment
Health
Crime
Edu and Jobs
Politics
Photos
Videos
Menu
Home
>
World
>
Hyderabad
National
International
Specials
Thu 01 Jan 1970
مزید دریافت کریں
Geographic Reference
City & Local Guides
Share
Tweet
No Comments For This Post, Be first to write a Comment.
Leave a Comment
Most viewed from
Hyderabad
Hyderabad begins Special Intensive Revision of electoral rolls...
KTR accuses Congress of pushing Telangana farmers into crisis...
No system yet to detect voters registered in two States, officials admit...
Hyderabad gets first footpath made entirely of recycled plastic paver blocks...
ABVP calls for state-wide school bandh on Tuesday, some schools already declare holiday...
Gulf Migrants’ Families Seek SIR Safeguards To Protect Votes of NRIs...
ABVP calls for state-wide school bandh on Tuesday...
BIS Raids Jewellery Store in Abids for Hallmarking Violations '1.6 kg gold seized'...
Two injured as car crashes into divider on Hyderabad ORR...
Tirupati pilgrimage boosts bus bookings from Hyderabad...
Man allegedly flees with gold worth Rs 20 cr in Hyderabad 'Jewellery Fraud'...
Janapriya Society secretary apologises for ‘Pakistani’ remark...
Most viewed from
World
Pranjal Patil, the country's first blind woman IAS officer...
12 Indians among 13 killed in Qatar gas plant explosion, 66 injured...
CRED founder Kunal Shah to become global CEO of WhatsApp...
15 killed in Lucknow fire at pet shop, gaming training centre, 4 arrested...
Google Data Centre Sparks Land Row As CPM Leader Alleges Illegal Allocation...
28 held for attempting irregularities in Bihar 'NEET retest'...
Massive Fire at Lucknow Coaching Centre Kills 14...
Indian, Bangladesh workers complain to Singapore ministry over unpaid wages...
Govt approves Rs 270 cr for Kavach automatic train protection system...
Fire breaks out at coaching centre in Lucknow...
PM SHRI Protest Turns Tense in Kerala, Police Use Water Cannons...
Keir Starmer announces his resignation as U.K. Prime Minister...
Todays Epaper
English Weekly
AIMIM News
Asaduddin Owaisi Demands EC Accept PAN, Driving Licence And Ration Cards For Verification In SIR
Jun 11, 2026
AIMIM Qutbullapur President Mohammed Muneeruddin interact with locals of Bachupally residents over absence of worship places
Jun 07, 2026
مزید دریافت کریں
Geographic Reference
City & Local Guides
Latest Urdu News
ٹمز اسپتال میں 122 جائیدادوں پر بھرتی کا نوٹیفکیشن جاری، درخواستیں 6 جولائی تک
حیدرآباد: گاندھی نگر کے سب انسپکٹر 50 ہزار روپے رشوت لیتے ہوئے اے سی بی کے ہاتھوں گرفتار
اداکار پرکاش راج کے خلاف ناقابلِ ضمانت وارنٹ جاری
حیدرآباد: اسپتال میں ڈیوٹی ڈاکٹر کاشف احمد مردہ پائے گئے، زہر کے انجکشن سے خودکشی کا شبہ
یوپی: محرم جلوس میں ’پاکستان زندہ باد‘ کے نعرے لگانے والا ہندو نوجوان نکلا
پرانجل پاٹل ملک کی پہلی نابینا خاتون آئی اے ایس آفیسر
لکھنؤ کوچنگ سینٹر میں خوفناک آتشزدگی، 15 افراد ہلاک، کئی زخمی
چھ نسلیں، 75 افراد اور 120 ایکڑ زمین: آندھرا پردیش کا مشترکہ خاندان اتحاد کی مثال
مسلم پرسنل لا بورڈ کا یو سی سی اور وندے ماترم کے خلاف قانونی جدوجہد کا اعلان
حیدرآباد: ڈیوٹی پر جانے والی سینئر  خاتون نرس ٹکر میں جاں بحق، ملزمان فرار
پربھنی ہنومان مندر میں المناک حادثہ، زیرِ تعمیر ہال کی چھت گرنے سے 7 ہلاک، 25 زخمی
بغیر ٹکٹ سفر کرنے والوں کے لیے بری خبر، جرمانہ دوگنا
امریکہ اور ایران کے درمیان تاریخی امن معاہدہ، جنگی کشیدگی کے خاتمے کا اعلان
حیدرآباد کے میڑچل میں خوفناک سڑک حادثہ، ایک ہی خاندان کے 3 افراد جاں بحق
نظام آباد کے 2 نوجوانوں پر اشرار کا حملہ
Most Viewed
San Francisco Turns to AI to Safeguard Whales From Ship Strikes
May 21, 2026
'US must respond': Trump admits Iran shot down Apache helicopter over Strait of Hormuz
Jun 10, 2026
Google 'North Korean hackers using AI to find cybersecurity blind spots'
May 12, 2026
Trump gives 'Clock ticking' warning to Iran, says to act fast or nothing will be left of them
May 17, 2026
Trump greets PM Modi on completing 12 years in office, says 'Strong, wise man'
Jun 11, 2026
Woman sets house on fire to frame relatives, dies of burns in UP
May 20, 2026
'Protect seafarers': PM flags sailors' safety at G7 Summit in Trump's presence
Jun 17, 2026
Sajjanar Launches India?s First AI Multilingual Complaint Recorder
May 23, 2026
Iran threatens to open new fronts against US and Israel amid deadlock, claims control over Hormuz
May 20, 2026
How do you feel about rising prices today?
Like Us
Etemaad Daily
Home
About Us
Advertise With Us
All Polls
Epaper Archives
Privacy Policy
Contact Us
Download Etemaad App
© 2026 Etemaad Daily News, All Rights Reserved. edible oil substandard mislabeling arrest alleged Hyderabad, Telangana, India Selling expired edible oils with tampered labels prov:wasAssociatedWith Shop owner Shop owner held for selling expired edible oils with tampered labels Selling expired edible oils with tampered labels prov:used edible oils selling expired edible oils with tampered labels Tampering labels on edible oils fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling tampered labels11b:T87a,Shop owner arrested for selling expired edible oils thehindu.com A shop owner allegedly repacking and selling expired edible oils with tampered labels was arrested on Tuesday.
During the raid, officials seized a total of 1,014 litres of edible oil valued at approximately ₹1.90 lakh.
Following a tip off, the South-East Task Force team of the Commissioner’s Task Force, along with Food Safety officials, raided Sri Ganesh Balaji Lakkadatar Oil in Sri Krupa Market, Mahbub Mansion, Malakpet.
The shop owner, identified as Ashok Kumar Agarwal, 51, a resident of Kachiguda, was found repacking edible oil packets with expired labels and using whiteners to suppress expiry dates and batch numbers without a repacking licence.
The seized items included 39 bottles of Fresh Heart brand oil with expired date stickers (each containing five litres), 27 bottles of the same brand (each containing two litres), 13 tins (each containing 15 litres) with expired date stickers, and 38 tins (each containing 15 litres) without date stickers.
Preliminary investigation revealed that Agarwal was purchasing edible oils in bulk and repacking them with altered labels to mislead customers and make profits.
The seized the material, and the accused was handed over to the Food Safety Officer, Greater Hyderabad Municipal Corporation (GHMC), Malakpet, for further legal action.
Published - March 11, 2025 08:56 pm IST edible oil Fresh Heart brand oil substandard mislabeling arrest seizure alleged Hyderabad, Telangana, India repacking expired edible oils prov:used edible oil repacking edible oil packets with expired labels Fresh Heart brand oil fflo:belongsToCategory Oils 39 bottles of Fresh Heart brand oil repacking expired edible oils fflo:hasAdulterationMethod tampering labels selling expired edible oils with tampered labels tampering labels fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling repacking them with altered labels to mislead customers tampering labels fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional to mislead customers and make profits whiteners fflo:foundAt Retail using whiteners to suppress expiry dates masking expiry dates fflo:hasFraudType Masking using whiteners to suppress expiry dates11c:T8fe,1.5k kg adulterated ghee seized from Udaipur factory, 2 detained | Jaipur News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Udaipur: In a joint action, Udaipur police and DST team conducted raid and busted a factory producing adulterated ghee, packaged under well-known brands such as Saras, Amul and Nova, in Kaladwas RIICO area here Saurday. Police seized 1,500kg spurious ghee from the factory and detained two workers.
DSP Chhagan Purohit said the factory was owned by Lokesh Jain, a resident of Salumber. During the raid, authorities seized 1,500kg of adulterated ghee. Two workers were also detained for questioning. "The ghee was being mixed with soybean, dalda, and essence, making it nearly indistinguishable from real ghee," said a food safety officer.
The adulterated products were packaged in containers resembling the authentic brands. A team from Saras Dairy was called to the site, who confirmed the ghee to be fake after inspection. Similarly, representatives from Nova and Krishna ghee companies were sent photos, who confirmed that the batch numbers did not belong to their companies
The factory's ground floor housed a tin warehouse, while ghee production occurred in the basement with machines and furnaces. Police said the counterfeit ghee was primarily distributed to local villages, especially during weddings and festivals, where demand for such products peaks. Approximately 150kg of ghee was distributed daily from this location, with higher quantities sold during weddings and the festive season. The accused sold one tin for Rs 4,200. ghee adulteration counterfeit soybean dalda essence raid seizure detention alleged Udaipur, Rajasthan, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant soybean ghee was being mixed with soybean ghee fflo:hasAdulterant essence The ghee was being mixed with soybean, dalda, and essence ghee fflo:hasAdulterant soybean The ghee was being mixed with soybean, dalda, and essence Adulteration of ghee in Udaipur prov:wasAssociatedWith Lokesh Jain factory was owned by Lokesh Jain Adulteration of ghee in Udaipur prov:used ghee busted a factory producing adulterated ghee Mixing ghee with soybean, dalda, and essence fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling packaged under well-known brands such as Saras, Amul and Nova soybean fflo:foundAt Processing ghee was being mixed with soybean11d:Ta2b,Cockroaches, hygiene lapses found in Hyderabad restaurant during raids indiatoday.in Cockroaches, hygiene lapses found in Hyderabad restaurant during raids
Food safety officials raided an upscale restaurant Hyderabad, 4 Seasons, over suspicion of hygiene violations in its kitchen. During the raid, the officials found cockroaches, improper storage, and mixing of vegetarian and non-vegetarian items.
Food safety officials conducted a surprise raid at an upscale restaurant in Hyderabad, 4 Seasons, and uncovered multiple hygiene violations. The restaurant, located in the city’s Tolichowki area, had unsanitary conditions in the kitchen, including improper storage practices.
During the inspection, officials found that the restaurant was mixing vegetarian and non-vegetarian items during cooking, raising concerns over food safety standards. Additionally, both veg and non-veg ingredients were being stored together, further violating the food protocols.
The inspection team also discovered cockroaches in the kitchen, highlighting serious lapses in cleanliness. The restaurant management has been issued a notice, and officials have warned of strict action if corrective measures are not implemented immediately.
Last month, an inspection at a leading dairy shop in Telangana’s Jangaon district took food safety officials by surprise when they found ghee stored within its premises to be infested with mosquitoes and houseflies.
While conducting inspections at the premises of Shakti Dairy, the authorities had found dead lizards near food items and the roof filled with cobwebs. The senior officer from the food safety department in Telangana promised strict actions under relevant provisions of the Food Safety and Standards Act against dairy owners.
Shakti Milk and Milk Products, also known as Shakti Dairy, is one of Telangana’s leading suppliers of dairy products with 40,000 litres of milk and yogurt being sold daily across the state, including Hyderabad, according to the dairy's website. ghee contamination mosquitoes and houseflies strict actions under relevant provisions of the Food Safety and Standards Act alleged Jangaon, Telangana, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant mosquitoes and houseflies found ghee stored within its premises to be infested with mosquitoes and houseflies cockroaches fflo:foundAt 4 Seasons officials found cockroaches in the kitchen Notice to 4 Seasons fflo:issuedBy Food safety officials restaurant management has been issued a notice finding of dead lizards near food items prov:wasAttributedTo Shakti Dairy authorities had found dead lizards near food items11e:T6a8,2,300kg of spurious paneer seized indiatimes.com Ahmedabad: More than 2,300kg of adulterated paneer was seized during a raid by a Food and Drug Control Administration (FDCA) team on Tuesday. The operation targeted Keshvi Food Products in Narsihpura in Kadi, Mehsana, which was allegedly manufacturing paneer without a valid food licence and using edible vegetable fat in its making.
During the raid, around 2,300kg of paneer, estimated to be worth around Rs 5.5 lakh, was seized on strong suspicion of adulteration in the interest of public health, officials said, adding that samples have been collected for laboratory analysis, and further legal action will be taken based on the test reports.
The seized paneer was reportedly being sold at approximately Rs 240 a kilogram to establishments around Ahmedabad, including Zamzam Restaurant and Hotel Sahyog in Viramgam; Musafir Restaurant in Kalol; Khodal Dhaba and Hotel Amiras and Hotel Satkar in Chhatral.
In a separate raid in Kadi, authorities seized around 1,600 kg of suspected adulterated cottonseed oil from Dharati Industries. The FDCA stated that these food items appeared unfit for consumption at first glance. "We have initiated a detailed investigation into the adulterated paneer manufacturing racket. We have begun collecting samples from hotels of highways to identify perpetrators," said Gujarat FDCA commissioner H G Koshia. cottonseed oil adulteration substandard seizure investigation suspected Kadi, Mehsana, Gujarat, India paneer fflo:hasAdulterant edible vegetable fat using edible vegetable fat in its making paneer adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Keshvi Food Products targeted Keshvi Food Products... manufacturing paneer11f:Ta60,SIT resumes questioning of two accused in Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration case - The Times of India indiatimes.com Tirupati: The special investigation team (SIT) resumed the questioning of two of the accused in the Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration case following a local court order, on Tuesday.
The special investigation team probing into the case filed a custody petition in the Tirupati court for two accused, Pomil Jain (Bhole Baba Dairy, Uttarakhand) and Apurva Chavda (Vyshnavi Dairy, Srikalahasti). The court granted three days custody of the two accused from Tuesday.
Following the court order, SIT sleuths took the duo into their custody from the district jail premises and shifted them to the SIT office at Alipiri for questioning.
It may be recalled that the SIT had arrested four accused including Tamil Nadu's Dindigul-based AR Dairy managing director R Rajasekharan, Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain from the Bhole Baba Dairy and Apurva Chavda from Vyshnavi Dairy on Feb 9 and they have been in judicial remand since then.
The Tirupati court had granted SIT custody of the accused for five days between Feb 14 and Feb 18 earlier. And now the SIT has once again sought the custody of two of the prime accused in the case for questioning after ascertaining that both Pomil Jain and Apurva Chavda were the duo among the four, who were involved in all stages of supplying ghee adulterated with animal fats to the TTD to be used in the preparation of the laddu prasadam. 
While the SIT is learnt to have already exposed many flaws in the TTD's tendering processes, SIT is now learnt to have sought the custody of Pomil Jain and Apurva Chavda to take the investigation into the next phase to ascertain the role of bigwigs in the Tirupati trust who allegedly pledged support to the adulterated ghee supply. ghee adulteration animal fats custody questioning alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fats supplying ghee adulterated with animal fats Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith R Rajasekharan arrested four accused including Tamil Nadu's Dindigul-based AR Dairy managing director R Rajasekharan Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba Dairy Pomil Jain (Bhole Baba Dairy, Uttarakhand) and Apurva Chavda Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith AR Dairy AR Dairy managing director R Rajasekharan Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Apurva Chavda ascertain the role of bigwigs in the Tirupati trust who allegedly pledged support to the adulterated ghee supply Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration prov:used ghee adulterated ghee supply120:T1450,4000 kg adulterated ghee worth Rs 17.5 lakh seized in this state - The Times of India indiatimes.com From Ayurveda to medical science, everyone considers ghee to be a nutrient-rich liquid that can help boost mental health, physical health, and overall metabolism. But, what if the same ghee turns out to be the reason for your illness? Well, that's true, because the market is flooded with kilos of adulterated ghee that is not safe for you. Scroll down to find the details.
As per latest PTI report, authorities seized 4,000 kg of suspected adulterated ghee valued at Rs 17.5 lakh from the premises of a firm selling dairy products in an industrial area at Deesa in Gujarat's Banaskantha district
According to the Gujarat Food and Drugs Control Authority (FDCA), the firm, Shri Navkar Dairy Products, had failed to comply with notices issued in the past under the provisions of the Food Safety and Standards (Licensing and Registration of Food Businesses) Regulation, 2011 and license was cancelled on September 4 last year.
As per the report, the officials at FDCA found that the ghee was adulterated with soybean and interesterified vegetable fat. It is also reported that authorities have taken action under the law and collected a total of 11 samples of different brands of ghee from the firm and have sent them to laboratory tests. Notably, the trading firm was in the past fined Rs 1.25 lakh for adulterating edible oil, and another Rs 25,000 in a criminal case for mixing colour in chillies, the FDCA said.
While adulteration of ghee and other edible items has become quite common, it is important for the masses to take extra care while buying foods. Here are a few tips and tricks one can follow while buying ghee and identify fake ghee.
Appearance and texture: Traditionally, ghee in its purest form has a golden color, rich and creamy texture. When held against light it should appear translucent and clear. The pale color of ghee could be indicative of preservatives and one should avoid it.
Packaging and label: It is important to pay special attention to the packaging and label of ghee products. A genuine ghee brand will have all major certificates of regulation compliances on it. The license number, date of packaging, expiry should be thoroughly checked before buying ghee.
Aroma and flavor: Naturally, ghee has a nutty flavor and a smooth consistency. The ghee should never smell burnt as it has a high heating point. The burnt smell could be because of the presence of water or addons. Hence, such ghee should be avoided at all costs.
While one can judge the ghee using the above-mentioned criteria before buying it, there are also other ways by which you can ensure that the ghee you are consuming is beneficial.
Palm test: Simply, pour frozen ghee on your palm and if it starts melting instantly then the ghee is pure. Else, it is not and such ghee should be avoided.
Boil test: Simply boil the ghee and remember that ghee has a higher heating point so if it starts smelling as burnt then you know it is not pure ghee. Bubbles and steam when boiling the ghee are also indicative of adulterated ghee. After you have boiled the ghee, refrigerate it in a jar. If you see layers forming in the jar there is a presence of some other oil too in the ghee.
Water test: Fill a glass of normal water at room temperature, add ghee to it, if the ghee floats it is unadulterated and if it sinks then the ghee is infused with foreign material.
Salt test: Add a pinch of Hyaluronic acid and tablespoon of salt to two spoons of ghee , after 20 minutes check the color of the ghee. If the ghee has turned red it means it is adulterated.
Iodine test: Add two drops of iodine solution to ghee if it turns purple then the ghee has a presence of starch in it. ghee adulteration soybean interesterified vegetable fat seizure license_cancellation suspected Deesa, Banaskantha, Gujarat, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant soybean ghee was adulterated with soybean Ghee adulteration finding fflo:inRegion Gujarat at Deesa in Gujarat's Banaskantha district ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod presence of water or addons indicated by burnt smell The burnt smell could be because of the presence of water or addons Palm test fflo:producesIndicator melting instantly if it starts melting instantly then the ghee is pure Palm test fflo:producesIndicator melting instantly if it starts melting instantly then the ghee is pure Boil test fflo:producesIndicator smelling as burnt if it starts smelling as burnt then you know it is not pure ghee Boil test fflo:producesIndicator burnt smell if it starts smelling as burnt then you know it is not pure ghee Boil test fflo:producesIndicator bubbles and steam Bubbles and steam when boiling the ghee are also indicative of adulterated ghee Boil test fflo:producesIndicator layers forming If you see layers forming in the jar there is a presence of some other oil Water test fflo:producesIndicator sinks if it sinks then the ghee is infused with foreign material starch fflo:detectedBy Iodine test if it turns purple then the ghee has a presence of starch in it Iodine test fflo:producesIndicator turns purple if it turns purple then the ghee has a presence of starch in it121:T4b3,Gujarat FDCA seizes 4,000 kg ‘adulterated’ ghee worth Rs 17.5 lakh indianexpress.com The Gujarat Food and Drugs Control Administration (FDCA) Wednesday seized 4,000 kg of suspected adulterated ghee in Deesa town of Banaskantha district.
The ghee, from Shri Navkar Dairy Products, was prima facie suspected to be adulterated, leading to a seizure worth Rs 17.5 lakh, said FDCA Commissioner Dr H G Koshia. He said that 11 ghee samples were sent to the food testing lab in Vadodara.
In May 8, 2024, the agency had conducted an inspection at the factory in Deesa and detected violation of the provisions of the Food Safety and Standards (Licensing and Registration of Food Business) Regulations, 2011. A notice was issued to the firm. However, after it did not comply with the notice the firm’s license was cancelled on October 4, 2024. ghee adulteration seizure license cancellation suspected Deesa, Banaskantha, Gujarat, India Seizure of 4,000 kg ghee fflo:targets ghee seized 4,000 kg of suspected adulterated ghee license cancellation fflo:issuedBy Gujarat Food and Drugs Control Administration the firm's license was cancelled on October 4, 2024 ghee fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy adulterated ghee122:Tcb3,Tirupati laddu row: Firm allowed to run plant except ghee, milk powder units newindianexpress.com MADURAI: The Madurai Bench of the Madras High Court on Friday permitted AR Dairy Food Private Limited to operate all its units except that of ghee and skimmed milk powder.
Justice V Lakshminarayanan passed the interim order on a petition filed by the company, represented by its authorised signatory R Rajadharshini, challenging an order passed by the central designated officer on February 14. The officer, who is the central licensing authority under the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) Act, 2006, had suspended the company’s licence for allegedly supplying substandard ghee to the prasadam unit of Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam (TTD).
In its petition, the company said the TTD rejected consignments, besides the first four, based on a report by a Gujarat-based laboratory. Though a food safety officer collected samples from the company’s manufacturing unit in Dindigul, and a ‘backdated’ report dated July 16, 2024 even stated that the samples comply with the FSSAI standards, the officer, relying solely on the Gujarat-based laboratory’s report, suspended the company’s licence, it alleged.
Additional Solicitor General ARL Sundaresan objected to the plea saying the company ought to have exhausted the appeal remedy under the FSSAI Act before approaching the court. However, because the petitioner is in the business for years on end and the adverse notice is issued on account of a single transaction, the judge observed that he does not want to close down the company as a whole by denying an interim order.
He ordered an interim stay to the effect that the suspension order will operate only with respect to ghee and skimmed milk powder and not with respect to other products being manufactured by the petitioner. He directed the FSSAI authorities to file a counter affidavit and adjourned the case to March 4, adding the interim order won’t be extended beyond that date. ghee substandard suspension of licence alleged Madurai, Tamil Nadu, India suspension order fflo:targets ghee suspension order will operate only with respect to ghee suspension order fflo:targets skimmed milk powder suspension order will operate only with respect to ghee and skimmed milk powder substandard ghee supply to TTD prov:wasAttributedTo AR Dairy Food Private Limited allegedly supplying substandard ghee to the prasadam unit of Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam IncidentFinding: substandard ghee supply to TTD fflo:foundIn ghee allegedly supplying substandard ghee to the prasadam unit IncidentFinding: substandard ghee supply to TTD fflo:supportedBy Gujarat-based laboratory report based on a report by a Gujarat-based laboratory alleged substandard ghee supply to TTD fflo:triggeredAction suspension of AR Dairy Food Private Limited licence suspended the company's licence for allegedly supplying substandard ghee suspension of AR Dairy Food Private Limited licence fflo:issuedBy central designated officer order passed by the central designated officer ghee fflo:compliesWith FSSAI standards samples comply with the FSSAI standards suspension order fflo:issuedBy FSSAI adverse notice is issued on account of a single transaction123:Td7c,Custodial Interrogation in TTD Laddu Ghee Case Ends deccanchronicle.com SIT presents accused in court; bail hearing postponed as investigation uncovers forged documents and adulteration links.
Tirupati: The custodial interrogation of the four accused in the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) laddu ghee adulteration case ended on Tuesday.
The Special Investigation Team (SIT) of the CBI, which interrogated the accused, took them to the S.V.R. Ruia Government Hospital for medical examinations before presenting them in the Second Additional District Magistrate (ADM) Court in Tirupati.
Earlier, the court granted five-day custody of the accused to the SIT on February 13, so that they could be interrogated. The accused remained in custody of the SIT till Tuesday, February 18.
Sources said the accused did not fully cooperate during the interrogation.
Meanwhile, the four accused have moved a bail petition, a hearing of which had been set on Monday. However, the hearing has been postponed to Wednesday.
The accused are Rajasekaran, managing director of AR Dairy in Tamil Nadu; Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain, former directors of Bhole Baba Dairy in Uttarakhand; and Apoorva Vinaykant Chawda, CEO of Vaishnavi Dairy.
Ghee, crucial for preparing the famous Tirumala laddus, is procured by TTD in large quantities through a structured tender process. Bhole Baba Dairy had been disqualified in 2019 and 2022 for supplying substandard ghee. Following this, Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain allegedly acquired shares in Vaishnavi Dairy. They then partnered with AR Dairy through Apoorva Chawda to secure the tender in 2024, allegedly using forged documents.
SIT uncovered that Vaishnavi Dairy acted as an intermediary, sourcing ghee from Bhole Baba Dairy and supplying it to TTD through AR Dairy. Laboratory tests confirmed the ghee had been adulterated with animal fat, prompting the investigation. ghee adulteration animal fat custodial interrogation bail petition lab_confirmed Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat ghee had been adulterated with animal fat TTD laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Rajasekaran accused in the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) laddu ghee adulteration case TTD laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Vipin Jain accused in the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) laddu ghee adulteration case Pomil Jain SCHEMA_MISMATCH former director of Bhole Baba Dairy Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain, former directors of Bhole Baba Dairy Vipin Jain SCHEMA_MISMATCH former director of Bhole Baba Dairy Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain, former directors of Bhole Baba Dairy ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Vaishnavi Dairy Vaishnavi Dairy acted as an intermediary, sourcing ghee from Bhole Baba Dairy ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith AR Dairy supplying it to TTD through AR Dairy ghee adulteration finding fflo:foundAtStep Distribution procured by TTD in large quantities through a structured tender process animal fat fflo:detectedBy LaboratoryTest Laboratory tests confirmed the ghee had been adulterated with animal fat ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Pomil Jain Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain allegedly acquired shares in Vaishnavi Dairy ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Apoorva Chawda partnered with AR Dairy through Apoorva Chawda ghee adulteration method fflo:hasFraudType Substitution sourcing ghee from Bhole Baba Dairy and supplying it to TTD124:T77c,Fake oil, other items worth Rs8.5 lakh seized | Nagpur News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Nagpur: Following a complaint about fake oil with labels and packaging of branded companies being sold, crime branch sleuths conducted a raid on Friday at a godown on Outer Ring Road in Hudkeshwar. 
Cops found a factory where local oil was being filled in bottles with labels of branded companies.
According to police, Anup Kolap (48), who hails from Mumbai, is currently working as a production inspector for branded oil companies. He received information that fake oil with labels of companies was being sold. So, he informed the crime branch, after which the raid was conducted. Police found 28 cans of oil, thousands of labels of branded companies, drums of oil, and a transport vehicle, all worth Rs7.6 lakh. 
Police seized all the material and even sent samples of oil for chemical analysis.
Cops have booked Nilesh Shahu, a resident of Hudkeshwar. Cops also learnt that he supplied the fake oil to some of the shopkeepers and took Rs1.5 lakh, which was also seized. 
The accused have been booked under relevant sections of BNS and the Copyright Act. Cops have not arrested the accused as it is a bailable offence but are questioning him. edible oil counterfeit substitution local oil raid seizure booking suspected Nagpur, Maharashtra, India chemical analysis fso:isPerformedOn samples of oil sent samples of oil for chemical analysis Fake oil production in Hudkeshwar prov:wasAssociatedWith Nilesh Shahu Cops have booked Nilesh Shahu, a resident of Hudkeshwar. Fake oil production in Hudkeshwar prov:used local oil Cops found a factory where local oil was being filled local oil fflo:foundAt godown on Outer Ring Road in Hudkeshwar Cops found a factory where local oil was being filled Fake oil production in Hudkeshwar prov:wasAssociatedWith Nilesh Shahu Cops have booked Nilesh Shahu, a resident of Hudkeshwar.125:T12f7,CBI suspects role of TTD â_x0080__x0098_insidersâ_x0080__x0099_ in laddu ghee adulteration case | Vijayawada News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Tirupati: The CBI-led special investigation team is now looking at the role of people within the 
Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (
TTD) in the laddu ghee adulteration case. 
CBI has arrested four accused â R Rajasekharan (AR dairy, Tamil Nadu), Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain (Bhole Baba dairy, Uttarakhand) and Apurva Vinaykanth Chavda (Vyshnavi dairy, Panabaka, AP) â in connection with the case so far. All four were granted police custody for five days by a local court on Thursday. 
In its remand report, CBI mentioned the alleged nexus between AR dairy, Vyshnavi dairy, and Bhole Baba dairy and how they managed to bag the ghee supply tenders floated by the TTD last year. 
It suspects some TTD officials may have pledged their support to the ghee contractors for supply of substandard and adulterated ghee.
The Supreme Court-mandated SIT has so far unravelled several aspects in the case and has exposed numerous flaws in TTD's tendering processes and quality control parameters, which the ghee contractors took advantage of and went on supplying substandard and adulterated ghee to the temple between 2019 and 2024.
As ghee is the main ingredient used in the preparation of Tirumala laddus, TTD has a huge requirement of ghee on a daily basis. Approximately 4 to 5 lakh laddus are prepared and distributed to devotees every day. The daily average requirement of ghee is about 15,000 kg, for which TTD follows the procedure of procuring Agmark special grade ghee in tankers for a period of six months in advance in three modules. 
In the first module, 20 lakh kg of ghee is procured from national dairies, about 10 lakh kg is procured from dairies located within 1,500 km radius from Tirumala in the second module, while about 5 lakh kg is procured from dairies located within Andhra Pradesh.
Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain, the promoters of Uttarakhand-based Bhole Baba dairy, are said to be the key players in the laddu ghee adulteration case. The CBI has found that the dairy directly supplied ghee to TTD from 2019, and despite their stocks getting rejected several times due to substandard quality, and subsequent disqualification after checks by TTD officials revealed their manufacturing practices were not up to required standards, they continued to supply ghee through indirect means. The SIT investigation found that Bhole Baba dairy kept supplying ghee to TTD in tins and tankers in the name of Vyshnavi dairy, which never produced a single kg of ghee but procured its entire requirement from Bhole Baba dairy on a 2-3% commission basis. A local commission agent and a TTD liaison, identified as PP Srinivasan, was the one who helped Bhole Baba and Vyshnavi dairies get ghee supply contracts from TTD by submitting fake and fictitious documents.
After they were disqualified by TTD in 2022, Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain purchased shares of Punabaka-based Vyshnavi dairy and became the firm's directors. Apurva Chavda, one of the directors of Vyshnavi dairy, then helped them connect with MD of Tamil Nadu-based AR dairy Rajasekharan, who agreed to be a part of their modus operandi when TTD called for fresh e-tenders for ghee supply in March 2024. After successfully bagging the contract, AR dairy procured ghee from Vyshnavi dairy, which in turn procured the same from Bhole Baba dairy and the same was sent in four tankers to TTD on June 12, 20, 25, and July 4 last year.
 This ghee was used in the preparation of the sacred laddu prasadam after they âpassed' the in-house tests carried out by TTD. ghee adulteration substandard substandard ghee arrest investigation alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India Tirumala laddus fkg:hasIngredient ghee ghee is the main ingredient used in the preparation of Tirumala laddus TTD fflo:compliesWith Agmark special grade ghee TTD follows the procedure of procuring Agmark special grade ghee Tirumala laddus fkg:hasIngredient ghee ghee is the main ingredient used in the preparation of Tirumala laddus laddu ghee adulteration case prov:used ghee laddu ghee adulteration case laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith AR dairy CBI has arrested four accused â R Rajasekharan (AR dairy, Tamil Nadu) laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Vyshnavi dairy Apurva Vinaykanth Chavda (Vyshnavi dairy, Panabaka, AP) in connection with the case laddu ghee adulteration case prov:wasAssociatedWith TTD officials suspects some TTD officials may have pledged their support Bhole Baba dairy prov:wasAssociatedWith laddu ghee adulteration case key players in the laddu ghee adulteration case AR dairy ghee supply act prov:wasAssociatedWith Rajasekharan MD of Tamil Nadu-based AR dairy Rajasekharan, who agreed to be a part of their modus operandi126:T1ecf,Uttarakhand firm behind adulterated ghee: SIT hindustantimes.com Uttarakhand firm behind adulterated ghee: SIT
The ghee which was found to be adulterated with animal fat and supplied to Tirumala temple for making of sacred “laddu prasadam” last year was supplied by Uttarakhand-based firm
The ghee which was found to be adulterated with animal fat and supplied to Tirumala temple in Andhra Pradesh for making of sacred “laddu prasadam” last year was supplied by Uttarakhand-based firm which was earlier disqualified by the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) in 2022, investigations by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI)-led special investigation team (SIT) revealed.
In its remand report submitted to the local court in Tirupati on Sunday night following the arrest of four persons belong to three different dairy firms, the SIT authorities disclosed that it was Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Private Limited, based out of Roorkee in Uttarakhand, which had supplied the ghee to TTD in June 2014, routing it through Sri Vyshnavi Dairy Specialities Pvt Ltd at Punabaka in Tirupati district and A R Dairy, Dundigal, Chennai.
The arrested were: Pomil Jain and Bipin Jain, directors of Bhole Baba Dairy, Apurva Vinay Kant Chawda, CEO of Sri Vaishnavi Dairy and Raju Rajasekharan, the MD of AR Dairy. The remand report which surfaced on Wednesday, was seen by HT.
Tirupati additional superintendent of police J Venkat Rao, who is also the investigating officer of the SIT, said in the report that Bhole Baba Dairy had supplied ghee to TTD at the rate of ₹291, in the name of Sri Vaishnavi Dairy in 2019. While Vaishnavi Dairy bagged the tenders for supply of ghee to the TTD, the entire ghee was supplied by Bhole Baba Dairy, which not only bore all expenses for transport but also paid 2-3% commission to Vyshnavi Dairy. Accordingly, Vyshnavi Dairy supplied ghee in tankers as well as in tins to the TTD in 2020.
In 2022, Bhole Baba Dairy also bagged the contract for supply of ghee in tankers to TTD under national supplier category. During that time, some of the ghee tankers of Bhole Baba Dairy were rejected as the ghee supplied did not pass the tests conducted by the in-house Lab of TTD.
During June 2022, the TTD plant inspection committee visited Bhole Baba Dairy plant at Fatehpur and submitted a report stating that the company had not submitted the records and documents for procurement of cow milk, payment details to the vendors, quality reports and ghee production. “Further, the inspection committee found that ghee manufacturing practices are not satisfactory in the Bhole Baba Dairy and so, it was technically disqualified to supply ghee tankers and tins to TTD,” the remand report said.
The SIT investigations revealed that Pomil Jain and Bipin Jain had acquired shares in Sri Vyshnavi Dairy and became its directors on January 18, 2024. While Apurva Chavda was continued as chief executive officer of Sri Vyshnavi Dairy, his relative Sabbil Kalimulla Khan alias Sameer (A-8) was retained as Plant Executive Officer of Vyshnavi Dairy, and they were looking after the affairs on behalf of Pomil Jain and Bipin Jain.
Meanwhile, AR Dairy, which has been selling milk from its Alapatti Chilling Centre to Sri Vyshnavi Dairy since long, joined hands with Apurva Chavda and agreed to take part in the tendering process for supply of ghee to the TTD. Apurva Chavda assured that he would take care of supply of ghee from Bhole Baba Dairy and offered a commission of ₹2.75 to ₹3 per kg to Rajasekaran.
They took the help of one P P Srinivasan, who was a liaison between the ghee suppliers and the TTD and was uploading the tender documents. In May 2023, Apurva Chavda created mail ID in the name of AR Dairy by giving his credentials for the purpose of participating in TTD ghee tenders.
“Though AR Dairy doesn’t have the capacity to make the required quantity of ghee, it produced fabricated documents to the TTD,” the SIT report said, adding that the earnest money deposit (EMD) was transferred to AR Dairy from the Bhole Baba Dairy account.
Thus, the AR Dairy procured ghee from Sri Vyshnavi Dairy and supplied it to the TTD starting from June, 2024. And Sri Vyshnavi Dairy in turn procured ghee from Bhole Baba Dairy, the report said.
Following complaints from pilgrims about the poor quality of laddu, the TTD got the lab test for adulteration of ghee done with NDDB-CALF Lab, at Anand in Gujarat from the samples collected from the last four ghee tankers in July. The test reports showed ghee adulteration with vegetable and animal fats.
“The TTD returned four ghee tankers to AR Dairy on July 25, but all the four tankers were taken to Sri Vyshnavi Dairy without going to AR Dairy. It was found that the AR Dairy also raised invoice in the name of Sri Vyshnavi Dairy Specialities Private Limited for the said four tankers,” the report said.
As the adulteration of ghee used for Tirupati laddu created a nation-wide outrage, Pomil Jain and Bipin Jain resigned as directors of Sri Vaishnavi Dairy on September 1. “In their place, new directors Surendra Singh and Saurabh Kashyap were appointed as per the records of ROC, Chennai. Investigation revealed that these new directors were their vehicle drivers,” the SIT report said.
- Srinivasa Rao is Senior Assistant Editor based out of Hyderabad covering developments in Andhra Pradesh and Telangana . He has over three decades of reporting experience. ghee adulteration animal fat vegetable fats return of four ghee tankers arrest of four persons lab_confirmed Tirupati, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat ghee which was found to be adulterated with animal fat ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable fats test reports showed ghee adulteration with vegetable and animal fats ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fats test reports showed ghee adulteration with vegetable and animal fats NDDB-CALF Lab analysis fso:isPerformedAt NDDB-CALF Lab lab test for adulteration of ghee done with NDDB-CALF Lab, at Anand in Gujarat Pomil Jain prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Private Limited Pomil Jain and Bipin Jain, directors of Bhole Baba Dairy Bipin Jain prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Private Limited Pomil Jain and Bipin Jain, directors of Bhole Baba Dairy Apurva Vinay Kant Chawda prov:wasAssociatedWith Sri Vyshnavi Dairy Specialities Pvt Ltd Apurva Vinay Kant Chawda, CEO of Sri Vaishnavi Dairy Pomil Jain prov:wasAssociatedWith Sri Vyshnavi Dairy Pomil Jain and Bipin Jain had acquired shares in Sri Vyshnavi Dairy and became its directors Bipin Jain prov:wasAssociatedWith Sri Vyshnavi Dairy Pomil Jain and Bipin Jain had acquired shares in Sri Vyshnavi Dairy and became its directors Apurva Chavda prov:wasAssociatedWith Sri Vyshnavi Dairy Apurva Chavda was continued as chief executive officer of Sri Vyshnavi Dairy AR Dairy prov:wasAssociatedWith Apurva Chavda AR Dairy... joined hands with Apurva Chavda Apurva Chavda prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba Dairy Apurva Chavda assured that he would take care of supply of ghee from Bhole Baba Dairy ghee adulteration act prov:used ghee AR Dairy procured ghee from Sri Vyshnavi Dairy and supplied it to the TTD ghee adulteration finding fflo:identifies vegetable fats test reports showed ghee adulteration with vegetable and animal fats ghee adulteration finding fflo:identifies animal fats test reports showed ghee adulteration with vegetable and animal fats ghee adulteration finding fflo:foundIn ghee test reports showed ghee adulteration with vegetable and animal fats ghee adulteration finding fflo:producedBy NDDB-CALF Lab analysis TTD got the lab test for adulteration of ghee done with NDDB-CALF Lab ghee adulteration finding fflo:triggeredAction return of four ghee tankers TTD returned four ghee tankers to AR Dairy on July 25 Sri Vyshnavi Dairy fflo:inRegion Chennai records of ROC, Chennai127:T1119,Manhunt launched for ex-CEO of Vaishnavi Dairy in Tirumala Laddu ghee adulteration case newindianexpress.com TIRUPATI: In the Tirumala laddu ghee adulteration case, the Supreme Court-formed CBI-led Special Investigation Team (SIT) has launched a manhunt to nab Sabbi Kalimulla Khan, former CEO of Vaishnavi Dairy, Srikalahasti, who reportedly played a key role in sending the rejected ghee tankers back to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) in June 2024.
Khan reportedly fled his hometown Srikalahasti when the SIT was formed to investigate the ghee adulteration case.
In a significant development, the SIT has started questioning one Srinivas, a commission agent from Chennai, who acted as a mediator between the TTD marketing department and AR Dairy management, in connection with the ghee adulteration case. The four accused in the case were sent to judicial remand two days ago.
Meanwhile, Supreme Court advocate Harshana Sukhdev reached Tirupati on Tuesday to argue on behalf of Accused 3, 4 and 5 against the SIT custody petition in the Second Additional District Magistrate Court.
Notices were already served on the accused as per the court’s direction regarding the custody petition filed by SIT on Monday evening.
Moreover, a bail petition was filed by A2, AR Dairy MD Raju Rajashekaran in the court on Tuesday.
Cases have been registered against the accused under Sections 274, 275, 316(5), 318(3), 299, 336, 61(2), and 340(2) of Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita.
Remand report
The SIT has already submitted a 14-page remand report. As per the report, Bhole Baba Organic Dairy of Uttarakhand played a key role in the supply of adulterated ghee to the TTD. Its directors Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain colluded with AR Dairy to supply the adulterated ghee to the TTD.
Ghee supplied to TTD with fake seals, GST bills
Adulterated ghee from Bhole Baba Dairy reached Vaishnavi Dairy in Tirupati district. The ghee was supplied to the TTD with fake seals, GST bills and lab reports.
Vaishnavi Dairy submitted a tender in the name of AR Dairy, and supplied ghee by creating false documents and FSSAI returns. The SIT had stated that the Earnest Money Deposit amount for securing the ghee supply tender was transferred from Bhole Baba Dairy account to AR Dairy account. After securing the tender on May 15, 2024, ghee was supplied to the TTD four times in June and July under the name of AR Dairy. The NDDB CAF lab report had confirmed that the ghee was adulterated with animal fat. The SIT has sought the custody of the accused to question them as part of the probe.
Accused in the case
Accused No. 1 AR Dairy, Tamil Nadu, A2 Rajashekaran of AR Dairy, A3 Apoorva Chawda of Vaishnavi Dairy, A4 Pomil Jain, A5 Vipin Jain, A6 Vaishnavi Dairy, and A7 Bhole Baba Dairy are named in the SIT report. ghee adulteration manhunt investigation pending_test India, Tirupati Tirumala laddu ghee adulteration case fflo:inRegion Tirupati TIRUPATI: In the Tirumala laddu ghee adulteration case Tirumala laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Vaishnavi Dairy former CEO of Vaishnavi Dairy, Srikalahasti, who reportedly played a key role in sending the rejected ghee tankers ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Raju Rajashekaran bail petition was filed by A2, AR Dairy MD Raju Rajashekaran ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Bhole Baba Organic Dairy of Uttarakhand played a key role in the supply of adulterated ghee ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Pomil Jain Its directors Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain colluded with AR Dairy ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Vipin Jain Its directors Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain colluded with AR Dairy ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Vaishnavi Dairy Vaishnavi Dairy submitted a tender in the name of AR Dairy, and supplied ghee by creating false documents ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith AR Dairy colluded with AR Dairy to supply the adulterated ghee ghee adulteration act prov:used ghee supply of adulterated ghee to the TTD ghee adulteration method fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling supplied ghee by creating false documents and FSSAI returns ghee adulteration incident prov:wasAttributedTo Vaishnavi Dairy A6 Vaishnavi Dairy... are named in the SIT report ghee adulteration incident prov:wasAttributedTo Bhole Baba Dairy A7 Bhole Baba Dairy are named in the SIT report128:T1689,SIT probe reveals supply of adulterated ghee to TTD thehansindia.com Tirupati: The remand report of the accused in the ghee adulteration case has uncovered significant findings from the Special Investigation Team (SIT) led by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI). The SIT arrested four individuals on Sunday night, exposing large-scale fraud, document forgery and financial misappropriation by AR Dairy, the primary supplier implicated in the scandal.
The controversy arose when devotees and temple authorities expressed concerns about the quality of ghee used in the renowned Tirupati laddus. In response, the TTD issued warnings to all suppliers, insisting on strict adherence to quality standards. While other suppliers complied, AR Dairy allegedly continued providing substandard ghee, prompting further investigation.  
In March 2024, TTD floated an e-tender for the supply of 10 lakh kilograms of cow ghee, limiting eligibility to suppliers within a 1,500 km radius of Tirumala.  
The tender was finalised on May 8, 2024, awarding the contract to AR Dairy at Rs.319.80 per kilogram. However, officials soon questioned the feasibility of supplying pure cow ghee at this price, leading to a comprehensive probe into the company’s operations.  
Between June 12 and July 4, 2024, AR Dairy delivered four consignments of ghee, all of which initially cleared TTD’s internal testing. However, growing doubts led TTD to collect additional samples from four more consignments on July 6 and July 12, 2024, which were sent to the NDDB CALF Lab in Gujarat, a reputed dairy testing facility. The results, received on July 16 and July 23, 2024, confirmed that the ghee was adulterated with vegetable and animal fats, rendering it unfit for human consumption.  
Further investigations revealed a deep-rooted fraud involving falsified records of their capacity of milk fat procurement and butter and ghee production. These fraudulent figures were incorporated into the company’s Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) returns, allowing it to fraudulently obtain the TTD contract.  
A financial review exposed collusion among multiple entities. On October 21, 2023, AR Dairy received Rs.70 lakh from Bhole Baba Organic Dairy — Rs 32 lakh for the 1,500 km category and Rs.38 lakh for the national category—indicating coordinated bid manipulation.  
Additionally, the Rs 51 lakh Earnest Money Deposit (EMD) required for tender participation was transferred from Bhole Baba Organic Dairy to AR Dairy’s bank account on March 11, 2024. Another Rs 29 lakh was deposited on May 21, 2024, further highlighting financial irregularities. Reports suggest that AR Dairy was promised a commission of Rs.2.75 to Rs.3 per kilogram of ghee supplied.  
The investigation identified Apurva Vinaykanth Chavda, CEO of Vyshnavi Dairy, as a key facilitator in the fraud. Chavda acted as a commission agent for multiple dairies, orchestrating the falsification of procurement records. Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain, directors of Vyshnavi Dairy played pivotal roles in document manipulation and employed commission agents to ensure AR Dairy secured the TTD contract.  
As the investigation progressed, several accused individuals attempted to evade arrest by going underground. Many switched off their mobile phones, procured new numbers, and attempted to destroy digital evidence. Key employees either resigned abruptly or refused to cooperate with authorities, further complicating the probe.  
A review of past transactions revealed that Bhole Baba Organic Dairy had been supplying ghee to TTD since 2019. Initially, the company provided ghee in tin containers at Rs 291 per kilogram. However, quality concerns emerged, leading to TTD rejecting Bhole Baba’s ghee tankers in 2022 after they failed in-house quality tests. Despite this, Bhole Baba remained involved in the supply chain through Vyshnavi Dairy, which acted as a front to secure future contracts. ghee adulteration vegetable fat animal fat warning to suppliers lab_confirmed Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India warning to suppliers fflo:issuedBy TTD TTD issued warnings to all suppliers ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable fat ghee was adulterated with vegetable and animal fats ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat ghee was adulterated with vegetable and animal fats ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith AR Dairy AR Dairy, the primary supplier implicated in the scandal ghee adulteration act prov:used ghee supply of adulterated ghee to TTD Tirupati analysis of ghee samples fso:isPerformedAt NDDB CALF Lab sent to the NDDB CALF Lab in Gujarat ghee adulteration finding fflo:foundIn ghee confirmed that the ghee was adulterated ghee adulteration finding fflo:producedBy laboratory test results, received on July 16 and July 23, 2024, confirmed that the ghee was adulterated AR Dairy prov:wasAssociatedWith fraud involving falsified records deep-rooted fraud involving falsified records of their capacity of milk fat procurement ghee adulteration fraud prov:wasAssociatedWith Apurva Vinaykanth Chavda Apurva Vinaykanth Chavda, CEO of Vyshnavi Dairy, as a key facilitator in the fraud ghee adulteration fraud prov:wasAssociatedWith Vyshnavi Dairy Vyshnavi Dairy, as a key facilitator in the fraud ghee adulteration fraud prov:wasAssociatedWith Pomil Jain Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain, directors of Vyshnavi Dairy played pivotal roles in document manipulation ghee adulteration fraud prov:wasAssociatedWith Vipin Jain Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain, directors of Vyshnavi Dairy played pivotal roles in document manipulation Vyshnavi Dairy prov:wasAssociatedWith falsification of procurement records Chavda acted as a commission agent for multiple dairies, orchestrating the falsification of procurement records129:T12da,CBI uncovers a web of deceit in Tirumala adulterated ghee case thehindu.com The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), which is probing the alleged Tirumala ghee adulteration case, has reportedly uncovered a web of deceit involving multiple entities. The remand report filed by the CBI, following the judicial custody of four key accused in the case on Sunday, has brought to light alarming details of the large-scale fraud.
Investigations revealed that AR Dairy, the prime accused in the case, had signed a contract with the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) to supply 10 lakh kgs of ghee. However, instead of procuring the ghee on its own, the AR Dairy procured it from Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Private Limited, a Roorkee-based company.
The ghee was then transported in tankers to Vaishnavi Dairy located near Srikalahasti, which in turn, supplied the stock to the TTD on the basis of fake GST invoices, forged documents, counterfeit laboratory reports, and fabricated warranty certificates.
The alleged fraud traces back to March 2022, when the TTD invited tenders for the supply of ghee. The representatives of Vaishnavi Dairy manipulated the documents and secured the contract in the name of AR Dairy as the latter neither had the qualifications to take part in the tendering process nor the production capacity.
Between June 12 and July 4, 2023, the TTD received multiple ghee consignments which were found to be substandard. The TTD then sent the samples for testing to the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) in Gujarat which confirmed the presence of animal fat in the samples.
The TTD then rejected several consignments in July which, instead of being returned to AR Dairy’s facility in Coimbatore, was redirected to Vaishnavi Dairy.
Further investigations revealed that the Bhole Baba Dairy had earlier supplied ghee to the TTD at ₹291 per kg in 2019. The company later collaborated with Vaishnavi Dairy, encouraging it to take part in the tenders with an assurance of supply and a commission of 2% to 3%.
Initially, Vaishnavi Dairy supplied ghee to the TTD. However, the TTD disqualified the firm by June 2022 after discovering the substandard quality of the ghee and its failure to provide records of procurement, payments to suppliers, and other relevant documents.
Bhole Baba Dairy directors Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain then sought an alternative route to secure the contract for the ghee. They approached AR Dairy’s Managing Director Rajasekharan and offered him a commission of ₹2.75 to ₹3 per kg to participate in the tendering process on their behalf.
The SIT, which arrested the four key accused in the case, has sought their custody, suspecting insider involvement in the scam. The investigators have raided the residences of Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain in Dehradun, and are learnt to have seized some crucial documents.
Once the scandal came to light, Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain, who were inducted as the directors of Vaishnavi Dairy, resigned in a bid to cover their tracks and appointed their drivers Surendra Singh and Sourabh Kashyap in their place. They also reportedly destroyed their mobile phones to mislead the authorities by claiming that they had lost their phones.
Published - February 11, 2025 07:25 pm IST ghee adulteration substandard testing pending_test India, Tirumala Tirumala ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith AR Dairy AR Dairy, the prime accused in the case Tirumala ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Private Limited AR Dairy procured it from Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Private Limited Tirumala ghee adulteration case fflo:supportedBy counterfeit laboratory reports counterfeit laboratory reports ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat confirmed the presence of animal fat in the samples testing of ghee samples fso:isPerformedAt National Dairy Development Board sent the samples for testing to the National Dairy Development Board ghee supply fraud prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba Dairy Bhole Baba Dairy had earlier supplied ghee to the TTD ghee supply fraud prov:wasAssociatedWith Vaishnavi Dairy Vaishnavi Dairy supplied ghee to the TTD ghee supply fraud prov:wasAssociatedWith Pomil Jain Bhole Baba Dairy directors Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain then sought an alternative route ghee supply fraud prov:wasAssociatedWith Vipin Jain Bhole Baba Dairy directors Pomil Jain and Vipin Jain then sought an alternative route substandard ghee finding fflo:foundAtStep Retail TTD received multiple ghee consignments which were found to be substandard ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod substitution with animal fat presence of animal fat in the samples Pomil Jain prov:wasAssociatedWith Vaishnavi Dairy inducted as the directors of Vaishnavi Dairy Pomil Jain fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional destroyed their mobile phones to mislead the authorities12a:T1502,Four held in TTD ghee row sent to jail till February 20 hindustantimes.com Four held in TTD ghee row sent to jail till February 20
The investigation revealed that AR Dairy, based in Tamil Nadu, secured the TTD contract to supply ghee at ₹319.80 per kg. However, AR Dairy did not have the capacity to produce such large quantities
The Special Investigation Team (SIT) under the supervision of Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) on Monday sought a 10-day custody of the four accused, who were arrested on Sunday evening in connection with a case related to alleged supply of adulterated ghee to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) for the preparation of “laddu prasadam,” people familiar with the matter said.
The four accused — Bipin Jain and Pomil Jain, directors of Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Private Ltd based in Roorkee in Uttarakhand, Apoorva Vinay Kant Chawda, chief executive officer of Sri Vaishnavi Dairy Pvt Ltd of Poonambakkam and Raju Rajasekharan, managing director of AR Dairy, Dundigal in Tamil Nadu — were produced before the second additional munsif court judge at his residence in Tirupati late on Sunday and remanded until February 20.
An official of the TTD familiar with the information said the SIT authorities, led by joint director of CBI, Hyderabad zone Veeresh Prabhu, interrogated several people belonging to Sri Vaishnavi Dairy and AR Dairy, besides employees of the TTD in the last three days.
“Based on the information they gathered from the questioning, the SIT authorities summoned the four accused for questioning on Sunday before making the arrests. The SIT told the judge that the accused were not cooperating and hence, sought police custody for 10 days to question them,” the official said.
The investigation revealed that AR Dairy, based in Tamil Nadu, secured the TTD contract to supply ghee at ₹319.80 per kg. However, AR Dairy did not have the capacity to produce such large quantities. Instead, they purchased ghee from Sri Vaishnavi Dairy Private Limited and supplied it to the TTD. They used falsified documents, fake seals, and forged papers to secure the contract.
“Interestingly, Sri Vaishnavi Dairy also did not produce the ghee. The actual supplier was Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Private Limited, located in Roorkee, Uttarakhand. This dairy shipped the ghee to AR Dairy in tankers, which AR Dairy then repackaged under different invoice numbers before supplying it to Tirumala.
During the examination of records, it was found that there were discrepancies in the pricing of ghee as well. “While Bhole Baba Dairy sold ghee to Sri Vaishnavi Dairy at ₹355 per kg, Vaishnavi Dairy then supplied it to AR Dairy for ₹319.80 per kg. This led to the suspicion that the ghee was adulterated,” the official said.
The SIT also collected details regarding the production capacity of the dairies, and their milk procurement sources. “The SIT is probing why Sri Vaishnavi Dairy supplied ghee when the contract was awarded to AR Dairy and why the TTD accepted ghee at ₹319.80 per kg when market prices were above ₹500 per kg,” the official added.
Senior BJP leader and TTD trust board member Bhanu Prakash Reddy said the SIT investigation has thoroughly exposed how the adulterated ghee was supplied to the TTD with the collusion of the then officials. “We request the SIT to identify the real culprits behind the whole scam and prosecute them,” Reddy said.
YSR Congress party spokesman and former minister Ambati Rambabu alleged that the Chandrababu Naidu government was trying to cover up its lies on the Tirupati laddu issue by spreading falsehood and making arrests with ulterior motives.
“The arrests being made are only a face saving exercise by Chandarbabu Naidu who lied on the quality of the Tirupati laddu alleging that there was animal fat in the ghee. There is absolutely no truth in the allegation that the ghee used for prasadam was contaminated,” the YSRCP leader said.
- Srinivasa Rao is Senior Assistant Editor based out of Hyderabad covering developments in Andhra Pradesh and Telangana . He has over three decades of reporting experience. ghee adulteration substitution mislabeling adulterated ghee arrest police custody alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India alleged supply of adulterated ghee to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams fflo:foundIn ghee alleged supply of adulterated ghee to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Private Ltd prov:wasAssociatedWith Bipin Jain Bipin Jain and Pomil Jain, directors of Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Private Ltd alleged supply of adulterated ghee prov:wasAttributedTo AR Dairy case related to alleged supply of adulterated ghee Use of falsified documents and fake seals fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling repackaged under different invoice numbers ghee shipment to AR Dairy fflo:occursAt Distribution shipped the ghee to AR Dairy in tankers ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod Repackaging under different invoice numbers repackaged under different invoice numbers before supplying it ghee supply fraud prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhole Baba Dairy Bhole Baba Dairy sold ghee to Sri Vaishnavi Dairy ghee supply fraud prov:wasAssociatedWith Sri Vaishnavi Dairy Sri Vaishnavi Dairy supplied ghee when the contract was awarded to AR Dairy ghee supply fraud prov:wasAssociatedWith AR Dairy suspicion that the ghee was adulterated12b:T8da,Tirupati Laddu Prasadam row: CBI arrests four people in ghee adulteration case dnaindia.com INDIA
The arrested individuals are linked to organizations that supplied ghee to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD), including AR Dairy from Tamil Nadu, Parag Dairy from UP, Premier Agri Foods, and Alpha Milk Foods, as stated by TDP.
The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) has arrested four individuals in connection with the adulteration of ghee used in the Tirumala Srivari Laddu, according to sources from Telugu Desam Party (TDP).
The CBI, acting on Supreme Court orders, formed a special investigation team (SIT) to probe the matter. The arrested individuals are linked to organizations that supplied ghee to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD), including AR Dairy from Tamil Nadu, Parag Dairy from Uttar Pradesh, Premier Agri Foods, and Alpha Milk Foods, as stated by TDP.
Those arrested include Bipin Jain and Pomil Jain, former directors of Bhole Baba Dairy (Roorkee, Uttarakhand), Vaishnavi Dairy (Poonambakkam) CEO Apoorva Vinay Kant Chawda, and AR Dairy (Dundigal) MD Raju Rajasekharan, the TDP added.
Further, according to TDP, the accused were interrogated for three days in Tirupati but reportedly remained uncooperative despite strong evidence against them. Investigations have revealed troubling allegations that animal carcass residues were found in the ghee, sparking outrage among devotees.
The probe, as reported by the TDP office, is being led by CBI Hyderabad Division Joint Director Viresh Prabhu, with support from Visakha CBI SP Muraliramba, DIG Gopinath Jetty, IG Sarvashrestha Tripathi, and FSSAI officer Satyakumar Panda.
Inspections have been carried out at multiple locations, including Tirumala, Tirupati, and AR Dairy's facility in Tamil Nadu, the TDP said.AR Dairy, which had a contract with TTD, has been found guilty of multiple irregularities. Joint Director Viresh Prabhu has been stationed in Tirupati to monitor the investigation, TDP added.
(This story has not been edited by DNA staff and is published from ANI) ghee adulteration animal carcass residues arrest investigation alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal carcass residues animal carcass residues were found in the ghee12c:Tb44,Tirupati Laddu Row: Four held by CBI in first arrests in Tirupati Laddu ghee adulteration case | Amaravati News - The Times of India indiatimes.com TIRUPATI: In first arrests in the Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration case, the Special Investigation Team (SIT) of the CBI on Sunday took four people into custody, including the MD of the Tamil Naidu dairy in the eye of the storm.
According to sources, the four include R Rajasekharan, MD of Dindigul-based AR Dairy; Vipin Jain and Pomil Jain of Uttarakhand-based Bhole Baba Dairy and Apoorva Chawda representing Vaishnavi Dairy from Nellore.
Sources said CBI arrested the four after questioning them over the last three days. The accused were produced before a local magistrate in Tirupati for remanding them.
The investigation by SIT revealed serious violations during ghee supply, with irregularities at every step, sources said.
The row had erupted in Sept last year when Andhra Pradesh CM N Chandrababu Naidu alleged that ghee adulterated with animal fat was used to prepare Tirupati laddus during the YSRCP govt.
The TDP later released a laboratory report in support of the allegations, which was refuted by YSRCP and dubbed as meant to tarnish the party.
Subsequently, the 
Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) blacklisted AR Dairy and lodged a complaint against them at the Tirupati East police station.
While the state govt began its probe, after the issue reached the doors of the Supreme Court, the court in Oct last year ordered the CBI to form a SIT to probe adulteration claims.
As per the orders of the SC, CBI joint director (Hyderabad) S Veeresh Prabhu, CBI SP (Visakhapatnam) Murali Rambha, Guntur IG Sarvashresth Tripathi and Visakhapatnam range DIG Gopinath Jatti and an FSSAI official formed part of the CBI probe. ghee adulteration animal fat arrest blacklisting investigation alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat ghee adulterated with animal fat was used animal fat fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee ghee adulterated with animal fat ghee adulterated with animal fat fflo:inRegion Tirupati ghee adulterated with animal fat was used to prepare Tirupati laddus Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration case prov:wasAssociatedWith Vipin Jain Vipin Jain and Pomil Jain of Uttarakhand-based Bhole Baba Dairy Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration case prov:wasAssociatedWith Pomil Jain Vipin Jain and Pomil Jain of Uttarakhand-based Bhole Baba Dairy Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration case prov:wasAssociatedWith Apoorva Chawda Apoorva Chawda representing Vaishnavi Dairy from Nellore Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration case prov:used ghee ghee adulterated with animal fat was used to prepare Tirupati laddus ghee adulteration violations fflo:foundAtStep ghee supply violations during ghee supply order to form CBI SIT fflo:issuedBy Supreme Court court in Oct last year ordered the CBI to form a SIT12d:Tdbd,Four arrested in Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration case scroll.in Four persons have been arrested by the Central Bureau Of Investigation-led Special Investigation Team in connection with the alleged adulteration of the ghee used in the laddus offered as prasadam at Tirupati’s Sri Venkateswara temple, PTI reported on Monday.
The SIT investigation revealed violations in the supply of ghee, which led to the arrests, PTI quoted an unidentified official as saying.
The individuals were identified by the official as Vipin Jain and Pomil Jain, former directors of the Bhole Baba Dairy, Apoorva Chawda from Vaishnavi Dairy and Raju Rajasekharan from AR Dairy.
Vaishnavi Dairy officials allegedly secured contracts through AR Dairy to supply ghee to the temple and created fake records to manipulate the tender process, the official said.
The investigators found that Vaishnavi Dairy falsely claimed to source the ghee from Bhole Baba Dairy, which lacked the capacity to meet the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam Board’s demand, PTI reported.
The board manages the Tirupati temple.
In September, Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu had claimed that substandard ingredients and animal fat were used to make the prasadam when the YSR Congress Party was in power in the state. The YS Jagan Mohan Reddy-led YSR Congress Party lost power in the Assembly elections that concluded in early June.
In October, the Supreme Court ordered the formation of an SIT to investigate the allegations by the Andhra Pradesh government that the previous administration had used ghee adulterated with animal fat to prepare laddus at the Tirupati temple.
The court had directed that the investigating team will have two officers from the CBI, two from the Andhra Pradesh Police and one senior official from the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India. It had also said that the probe will be carried out under the supervision of the CBI director.
The central investigative agency had set up the five-member SIT in November.
The Supreme Court had also questioned the propriety of Naidu’s claims, which were made despite the matter being under investigation by the temple authorities.
The bench had verbally observed that according to the laboratory reports it had seen, the ghee samples tested for contamination came from rejected batches that were not used to make laddus. ghee adulteration arrest alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration prov:used ghee alleged adulteration of the ghee used in the laddus Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration prov:used laddu alleged adulteration of the ghee used in the laddus Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Vipin Jain Vipin Jain and Pomil Jain, former directors of the Bhole Baba Dairy Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Pomil Jain Vipin Jain and Pomil Jain, former directors of the Bhole Baba Dairy Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Apoorva Chawda Apoorva Chawda from Vaishnavi Dairy Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Raju Rajasekharan Raju Rajasekharan from AR Dairy ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat substandard ingredients and animal fat were used to make the prasadam Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Vaishnavi Dairy Vaishnavi Dairy officials allegedly secured contracts through AR Dairy to supply ghee Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith AR Dairy secured contracts through AR Dairy to supply ghee to the temple12e:T9e2,Tirupati: 'CBI Arrests 4 In Tirumala Srivari Laddu Ghee Adulteration Case': Telugu Desam Party freepressjournal.in Amaravati: The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) has arrested four individuals in connection with the adulteration of ghee used in the Tirumala Srivari Laddu, according to sources from Telugu Desam Party (TDP).
The CBI, acting on Supreme Court orders, formed a special investigation team (SIT) to probe the matter. The arrested individuals are linked to organizations that supplied ghee to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD), including AR Dairy from Tamil Nadu, Parag Dairy from Uttar Pradesh, Premier Agri Foods, and Alpha Milk Foods, as stated by TDP.
Those arrested include Bipin Jain and Pomil Jain, former directors of Bhole Baba Dairy (Roorkee, Uttarakhand), Vaishnavi Dairy (Poonambakkam) CEO Apoorva Vinay Kant Chawda, and AR Dairy (Dundigal) MD Raju Rajasekharan, the TDP added.
Further, according to TDP, the accused were interrogated for three days in Tirupati but reportedly remained uncooperative despite strong evidence against them. Investigations have revealed troubling allegations that animal carcass residues were found in the ghee, sparking outrage among devotees.
The probe, as reported by the TDP office, is being led by CBI Hyderabad Division Joint Director Viresh Prabhu, with support from Visakha CBI SP Muraliramba, DIG Gopinath Jetty, IG Sarvashrestha Tripathi, and FSSAI officer Satyakumar Panda. Inspections have been carried out at multiple locations, including Tirumala, Tirupati, and AR Dairy's facility in Tamil Nadu, the TDP said.
AR Dairy, which had a contract with TTD, has been found guilty of multiple irregularities. Joint Director Viresh Prabhu has been stationed in Tirupati to monitor the investigation, TDP added.
Disclaimer: This is a syndicated feed. The article is not edited by the FPJ editorial team. ghee adulteration animal carcass residues arrest investigation alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal carcass residues animal carcass residues were found in the ghee Tirumala Srivari Laddu fkg:hasIngredient ghee adulteration of ghee used in the Tirumala Srivari Laddu ghee adulteration in Tirumala Srivari Laddu prov:wasAssociatedWith Apoorva Vinay Kant Chawda Vaishnavi Dairy (Poonambakkam) CEO Apoorva Vinay Kant Chawda ghee adulteration in Tirumala Srivari Laddu prov:wasAssociatedWith Raju Rajasekharan AR Dairy (Dundigal) MD Raju Rajasekharan AR Dairy fflo:foundAt Tamil Nadu AR Dairy's facility in Tamil Nadu12f:T91a,Tirupati Laddu row: Four arrested individuals sent to judicial custody till February 20 indiatimes.com Related
A Tirupati court, later in the day, sent the four arrested accused to judicial custody till February 20.
The action was taken as the investigation revealed serious violations during ghee supply, with irregularities at every step.
Representatives of Vaishnavi Dairy secured tenders in the name of AR Dairy for ghee supply. Vaishnavi Dairy fabricated false documents and seals, using the AR Dairy name to manipulate the tender process. Fake records were created by Vaishnavi Dairy, claiming to have sourced ghee from Bhole Baba Dairy in Roorkee.
The row arose when in July, lab tests revealed foreign fats in the ghee supplied by AR Dairy Foods. This led to the contractor being blacklisted by the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD), which then switched to sourcing ghee from the Karnataka Milk Federation.
The renowned laddu prasadam at the sacred Lord Venkateswara shrine in Tirupati, Andhra Pradesh, is famous for its unique taste. These iconic laddus are prepared daily in the temple kitchen, known as the Potu. The preparation process, called dittam, strictly dictates the ingredients and their quantities. Over its long history, the recipe has only been altered six times. Originally made using besan (chickpea flour) and jaggery syrup to extend shelf life, almonds, cashews, and raisins were later added to enhance flavor and nutrition. ghee adulteration foreign fats blacklisting alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant foreign fats lab tests revealed foreign fats in the ghee foreign fats fflo:detectedBy lab tests lab tests revealed foreign fats ghee supply adulteration prov:used ghee violations during ghee supply ghee supply fraud prov:wasAssociatedWith Vaishnavi Dairy Vaishnavi Dairy fabricated false documents and seals ghee supply adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith AR Dairy Foods lab tests revealed foreign fats in the ghee supplied by AR Dairy Foods blacklisting of contractor fflo:issuedBy Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams contractor being blacklisted by the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams Tirupati Laddu fkg:hasIngredient besan Originally made using besan Tirupati Laddu fkg:hasIngredient jaggery syrup Originally made using besan (chickpea flour) and jaggery syrup130:T1200,Tirumala laddu row: CBI arrests four suppliers involved in the Tirumala ghee adulteration case thehindu.com In a significant breakthrough, the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) has arrested four suppliers implicated in the Tirumala alleged ghee adulteration scandal. The accused include managing director of AR Dairy Rajasekharan, directors of Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Vipin Jain and Pinole Jain and CEO of Sri Vaishnavi Dairy Private Limited Apoorva Chawda.
A Special Investigation Team (SIT) led by CBI Joint Director Viresh Prabhu took the accused into custody on Sunday (February 09). The SIT was constituted by the Supreme Court to probe the allegations of adulterated ghee being used in the preparation of sacred laddus at the temple of Lord Venkateswara.
Investigations revealed that representatives of Vaishnavi Dairy had fraudulently secured tenders in the name of AR Dairy by submitting forged documents. Discrepancies in pricing and supply chain processes also raised suspicions, with Vaishnavi Dairy purchasing ghee at ₹355 per kilogram but selling it to AR Dairy at ₹319.80 per kg.
The team also collected the information regarding the production capacity of the AR Dairy, the quantum of milk produced and as to why did the Vaishnavi Dairy supply the ghee when the AR Dairy had entered into an agreement with the TTD. Inquiries were also made as to how could the AR Dairy supply the ghee when it was sold at Rs. 500 per kg in the open market.
The controversy dates back to September 25 last year, when a complaint was filed alleging adulterated ghee was used in the preparation of laddus. The Supreme Court intervened in October, forming the five-member SIT to investigate the case under the supervision of CBI Director.
The five-member probe team included two from the CBI, two from the Andhra Pradesh government, and one from the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI).
The AP government was represented by Guntur Range IG Sarvashreshtha Tripathi and Visakhapatnam Range DIG Gopinath Jetty. The CBI was represented by Hyderabad Zone Joint Director Veeresh Prabhu and Visakhapatnam SP Murali, along with FSSAI advisor Satyen Kumar Panda.
AR Dairy had secured the contract for the supply of 10 lakh kilograms of ghee to TTD at ₹319.80 per kilogram during the previous YSRCP regime in the State. The first two consignments of ghee was delivered to TTD on July 6 and 17 but was rejected by TTD after quality checks revealed it was substandard.
Suspecting a foul play, the TTD sent the samples to the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) in Gujarat which confirmed the presence of animal fat in the ghee that was supplied.
The accused were presented before the II Additional Munsiff Court judge in Tirupati on Sunday night, who remanded them to judicial custody until February 20.
Published - February 10, 2025 04:25 pm IST ghee adulteration animal fat arrest judicial custody alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India Tirumala ghee adulteration scandal prov:wasAssociatedWith Rajasekharan arrested four suppliers implicated in the Tirumala alleged ghee adulteration scandal. The accused include managing director of AR Dairy Rajasekharan ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat confirmed the presence of animal fat in the ghee Tirumala ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Vipin Jain arrested four suppliers implicated in the Tirumala alleged ghee adulteration scandal Tirumala ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Pinole Jain arrested four suppliers implicated in the Tirumala alleged ghee adulteration scandal Tirumala ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Apoorva Chawda CBI has arrested four suppliers implicated in the Tirumala alleged ghee adulteration scandal Tirumala ghee adulteration scandal prov:used ghee allegations of adulterated ghee being used in the preparation of sacred laddus Tirumala ghee adulteration scandal prov:wasAssociatedWith AR Dairy managing director of AR Dairy Rajasekharan Tirumala ghee adulteration scandal prov:wasAssociatedWith Sri Vaishnavi Dairy Private Limited CEO of Sri Vaishnavi Dairy Private Limited Apoorva Chawda Tirumala ghee adulteration scandal prov:wasAssociatedWith AR Dairy fraudulently secured tenders in the name of AR Dairy ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith AR Dairy complaint was filed alleging adulterated ghee was used animal fat fflo:foundAt Distribution consignments of ghee was delivered to TTD ghee adulteration finding fflo:foundIn ghee confirmed the presence of animal fat in the ghee ghee adulteration finding fflo:foundAtStep Distribution consignments of ghee was delivered to TTD131:Tcff,Probe agency arrests four persons in Tirupati ghee adulteration case: Sources indiatoday.in Probe agency arrests four persons in Tirupati ghee adulteration case: Sources
The CBI arrested four individuals over adulteration in Tirumala laddu ghee supply. The probe revealed forged documents and tender manipulations. The accused will appear in Tirupati court. Investigations continue into violations linked to the previous state government.
The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) on Sunday arrested four individuals in connection with the Tirumala laddu adulteration case, sources told India Today. Those arrested include Bipin Jain and Pomil Jain, former directors of Bhole Baba Dairy in Roorkee; Vaishnavi Dairy CEO Apoorva Vinay Kant Chawda; and AR Dairy Managing Director Raju Rajasekharan.
The four were arrested as part of an investigation into irregularities in ghee supply for the preparation of Tirumala laddus.
The probe revealed that representatives of Vaishnavi Dairy secured tenders in the name of AR Dairy, the sources said.
Officials found that Vaishnavi Dairy created false documents and seals to manipulate the tender process. Fake records indicated ghee procurement from Bhole Baba Dairy, which did not have the capacity to supply the required quantities.
According to the sources, the accused will be presented before the Tirupati court tomorrow. Special Investigation Team (SIT) member and CBI Joint Director Viresh Prabhu, who has been in Tirupati to oversee the probe, is expected to be present in court.
The case dates back to the previous government led by Y S Jagan Mohan Reddy’s tenure, when impure materials were reportedly found in the laddu prasadam. Earlier, the Supreme Court directed the CBI-monitored SIT probe into the allegations. The team also included members from the Andhra Pradesh government and the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI).
The investigation began last year. The Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) requires 15,000 kg of cow ghee daily for laddu preparation. AR Foods from Tamil Nadu secured a tender to supply ghee at Rs 320 per kg. On July 8, eight tankers of ghee arrived, and four were sent for testing. On July 17, lab reports confirmed the presence of impure substances in the ghee.
Authorities continue to investigate the case to determine the extent of the violations and those responsible. ghee adulteration substitution counterfeit impure substances arrest investigation alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India Tirumala laddu ghee adulteration prov:used ghee irregularities in ghee supply for the preparation of Tirumala laddus Tirumala laddu ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith Raju Rajasekharan AR Dairy Managing Director Raju Rajasekharan Bhole Baba Dairy prov:wasAssociatedWith Bipin Jain Bipin Jain and Pomil Jain, former directors of Bhole Baba Dairy AR Dairy prov:wasAssociatedWith Raju Rajasekharan AR Dairy Managing Director Raju Rajasekharan cow ghee fflo:hasAdulterant impure substances lab reports confirmed the presence of impure substances in the ghee impure substances fflo:detectedBy LaboratoryTest lab reports confirmed the presence of impure substances Lab report confirming impure substances in ghee fflo:foundAtStep Distribution On July 17, lab reports confirmed the presence of impure substances in the ghee132:T12a4,25% of food samples tested in Raj in 2024 found adulterated | Jaipur News - Times of India indiatimes.com Jaipur: In a troubling revelation, laboratory analyses conducted by the health department in Rajasthan have indicated that a significant 25.5% of food samples tested in 2024 were found to be substandard and adulterated.
In Jaipur, the situation was even more alarming, with 28.5% of food samples failing quality tests for adulteration. The extensive study covered 14,061 samples, out of which 3,595 were deemed unsatisfactory, containing various adulterants ranging from milk and sweets to spices and edible oils.
The findings raise serious concerns regarding consumer safety across the state. Alarmingly, 591 samples were classified as hazardous for human consumption. The health department discovered that several prominent restaurants and eateries were operating under unsanitary conditions and expired packaged food items were seized from there.
Deputy Commissioner of Food Safety, Pankaj Ojha said that Rajasthan has emerged as a leader in food quality testing, achieving 300% of the target set by the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) for sample collection. 
"This year (2024) marked a milestone as Rajasthan ranked sixth in the national food safety index for the first time, while also being recognised for having the best laboratory network in the country," Ojha said.
In response to the rising issue of food adulteration, the Bhajan Lal Sharma-led govt launched a campaign titled "Shudh Aahaar, Milawat Par Vaar," aimed at intensifying efforts against this malpractice. The health department subsequently took decisive action, seizing or destroying over 6.6 lakh kgs of adulterated food products in 2024 alone. Legal action was also escalated, with more than 3,915 cases filed in various courts against individuals and firms involved in food adulteration.
The health department's swift response included filing 527 cases against food adulterators in just two days, on Nov 11 and 12, with a total of 3,114 cases already decided, resulting in a hefty penalty of Rs 11.2 crore imposed on guilty traders.
Noteworthy findings revealed that spice samples contained harmful substances, such as acetamiprid and imidacloprid, at levels deemed unsafe for consumption. Moreover, unscrupulous traders were found to be using harmful colouring agents in sweets and substituting animal fat with cheaper vegetable fats in ghee.
In the case of edible oils, cheaper oils were mixed with more expensive varieties, and milk powder was used to prepare mawa and paneer, further illustrating the lengths to which some traders will go for profit. ghee adulteration vegetable fats Seizure of 6.6 lakh kgs adulterated food alleged Rajasthan, India Seizure of 6.6 lakh kgs adulterated food fflo:issuedBy Health Department health department subsequently took decisive action, seizing or destroying over 6.6 lakh kgs of adulterated food products Sweets fflo:hasAdulterant Harmful colouring agents unscrupulous traders were found to be using harmful colouring agents in sweets Ghee fflo:hasAdulterant Vegetable fats substituting animal fat with cheaper vegetable fats in ghee Vegetable fats fflo:isSubstituteFor Animal fat substituting animal fat with cheaper vegetable fats Mawa fflo:hasAdulterant Milk powder milk powder was used to prepare mawa and paneer 2024 Food Adulteration Survey fflo:inRegion Rajasthan laboratory analyses conducted by the health department in Rajasthan Rajasthan 2024 Food Adulteration Survey fflo:inRegion Jaipur In Jaipur, the situation was even more alarming 2024 Rajasthan Food Adulteration Survey fflo:foundIn Milk containing various adulterants ranging from milk and sweets 2024 Rajasthan Food Adulteration Survey fflo:foundIn Sweets containing various adulterants ranging from milk and sweets 2024 Rajasthan Food Adulteration Survey fflo:foundIn spices ranging from milk and sweets to spices and edible oils 2024 Rajasthan Food Adulteration Survey fflo:foundIn edible oils ranging from milk and sweets to spices and edible oils Hazardous Food Samples fflo:inRegion Rajasthan 591 samples were classified as hazardous for human consumption Filing of 3,915 legal cases fflo:issuedBy Health Department Legal action was also escalated, with more than 3,915 cases filed Imposition of Rs 11.2 crore penalty fflo:issuedBy Rajasthan Health Department resulting in a hefty penalty of Rs 11.2 crore imposed on guilty traders Spices fflo:hasAdulterant Acetamiprid spice samples contained harmful substances, such as acetamiprid Spices fflo:hasAdulterant Imidacloprid spice samples contained harmful substances, such as acetamiprid and imidacloprid Edible oils fflo:hasAdulterant Cheaper oils cheaper oils were mixed with more expensive varieties133:T108d,Many Restaurants Violated Food Safety Rules: Task Force Officials deccanchronicle.com At Kishkindha Kitchen, also in Jubilee Hills, which lacked essential documents, the refrigerators were found to be dirty and filled with food waste, while kitchen drains were clogged with waste
Hyderabad: Inspections by the state task force on Saturday highlighted violations in two establishments in the city, while a raid in a dairy shop in Jangaon found 700 kg of curd infested with fungus and a dead lizard near food products.
The task force found Poshnoosh Lounge & Bar at Jubilee Hills was operating with an licence which had lapsed on December 20, 2024. The task force flagged the condition of the kitchen as unsanitary, with refrigerators improperly cleaned and not defrosted. The kitchen lacked a proper drainage system to dispose of food waste, and there was an opening to the outside without a window or insect-proof screen, raising concerns about contamination.
The restaurant also violated food safety standards by improperly storing food, including mixing vegetarian and non-vegetarian items, and placing food directly on the ground. Expired and misbranded sichuan oepper, imported from Bangkok without import details, was seized. The inspection also flagged the presence of industrial-use citric acid and several expired food products, such as soy sauce, papad, rasam powder, onion powder, kajun mix, mushrooms, and packed methi. In addition, loose split cashews were found to be infested with insects, posing a further risk to consumer health.
At Kishkindha Kitchen, also in Jubilee Hills, which lacked essential documents, the refrigerators were found to be dirty and filled with food waste, while kitchen drains were clogged with waste. Raw food materials, semi-prepared items, and non-food products were stored together, increasing the likelihood of cross-contamination.
Cockroaches were found in the kitchen and rat feces in the storage area, suggesting a rodent infestation.
The task force also uncovered expired food items here, including orange juice, button mushrooms, sunflower seeds, and packed rai, which were discarded.
Key documents such as water analysis reports, pest control records, FSSAI certificates (Fostac), and employee medical records were not provided to the inspection team at both establishments. Both FBOs were issued notices for immediate rectification.
At Shakti Milk and Milk Products, located in Raghunathpally, Jangaon district, an inspection revealed a dead lizard found near food articles. The presence of houseflies and mosquitoes in stored ghee was noted. Spider webs were seen on the roof and patchy roofing and flooring in cold storage room.
The task force discarded 720 kg of curd due to contamination, fungal infestation, and spoilage. Additionally, 1,700 kg of curd was seized due to labelling violations and suspicions of substandard quality. Samples from the facility were collected for laboratory analysis to assess the quality of the products. ghee contamination houseflies and mosquitoes immediate rectification notice suspected Raghunathpally, Jangaon, Telangana, India curd fflo:hasAdulterant fungus 700 kg of curd infested with fungus curd fflo:hasAdulterant dead lizard 700 kg of curd infested with fungus and a dead lizard near food products split cashews fflo:hasAdulterant insects loose split cashews were found to be infested with insects rat feces fflo:foundAt Storage rat feces in the storage area ghee fflo:hasAdulterant houseflies and mosquitoes presence of houseflies and mosquitoes in stored ghee curd fflo:hasAdulterant fungal infestation discarded 720 kg of curd due to contamination, fungal infestation, and spoilage industrial-use citric acid fflo:foundAt Poshnoosh Lounge & Bar presence of industrial-use citric acid Kishkindha Kitchen inspection finding prov:wasAttributedTo Kishkindha Kitchen At Kishkindha Kitchen... which lacked essential documents Cockroaches fflo:foundAt Kishkindha Kitchen Cockroaches were found in the kitchen dead lizard fflo:foundAt Shakti Milk and Milk Products dead lizard found near food articles Shakti Milk contamination finding fflo:triggeredAction immediate rectification notice Both FBOs were issued notices for immediate rectification134:Tbd2,Mosquitoes Found In Ghee: Mosquitoes in ghee and dead lizard found in dairy items in this city - The Times of India indiatimes.com Authorities recently conducted an inspection at Shakti Milk and Milk Products in Raghunathpally Mandal, Jangaon district, uncovering multiple violations related to hygiene and food safety standards. The findings have raised serious concerns about the facility's compliance with essential health regulations.
During the inspection on February 1, 2025, the State-level Task Force team identified several critical lapses. The Commissioner of Food Safety, Telangana, reported that food handlers were not following proper sanitary practices during processing and handling. Structural deficiencies, such as a damaged roof and flooring in the cold storage area, were also noted. Inspectors found pests, including house flies and mosquitoes, in stored ghee, while a dead lizard was discovered near food articles. Additionally, spider webs were observed on the roof.
Credit: x/@cfs_telangana
Additional lapses in compliance included the absence of essential records such as pest control logs and water analysis reports. Inspectors also found unclean and rusted equipment, raising concerns about the facilityâs maintenance standards. 
Storage areas were in disarray, with raw food items stacked haphazardly, increasing the risk of contamination. Packaged products were also found to have improper or missing labels, violating food safety regulations.
As a result, the authorities discarded 720 kg of curd that had been contaminated, spoiled, or infested with fungi. Additionally, 1,700 kg of curd was seized over labeling defects and suspected substandard quality. 
For a thorough investigation, samples have been collected for laboratory analysis. The Task Force team has confirmed that further action will be taken under the Food Safety and Standards (FSS) Act, 2006, and the FSS Rules and Regulations, 2011.
Credit: x/@cfs_telangana
The information was shared on the official X(formerly Twitter) page of the Commissioner of Food Safety, Telangana. The team also shared pictures from their inspection, which showed spoiled, and fungi-ridden food. One user commented, âThere are many such plants in the old city where the inspection team never dares to enter.â
Hygiene issues at food establishments in India remain a widespread concern, with frequent reports of violations. Poor sanitation, contaminated ingredients, and regulatory lapses often put public health at serious risk. ghee contamination mosquitoes inspection alleged Jangaon, Telangana, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant mosquitoes pests, including house flies and mosquitoes, in stored ghee curd fflo:hasAdulterant fungi curd that had been contaminated, spoiled, or infested with fungi mosquitoes fflo:foundAt Storage mosquitoes, in stored ghee dead lizard fflo:foundAt Storage dead lizard was discovered near food articles Packaged products fflo:hasAdulterationMethod Mislabeling improper or missing labels, violating food safety regulations135:Tbd8,Mosquitoes in ghee, dead lizard: Telangana food commissioner uncovers violations at dairy inspection hindustantimes.com Mosquitoes in ghee, dead lizard: Telangana food commissioner uncovers violations at dairy inspection
A state-level task force inspection in Telangana uncovered significant sanitary breaches at Shakti Milk and Milk Products, leading to the seizure.
In a recent inspection conducted on February 1, 2025, the State-level Task force team identified multiple critical violations at Shakti Milk and Milk Products in Raghunathpally Mandal, Jangaon district. The Commissioner of Food Safety, Telangana, reported that food handlers were not adhering to adequate sanitary measures during processing and handling. The inspection revealed structural issues, including a patchy roof and floor in the cold storage room and the presence of pests such as houseflies and mosquitoes in stored ghee. Alarmingly, a dead lizard was found near food articles, and spider webs were observed on the roof.
Further deficiencies included the absence of pest control records and water analysis reports, unclean and rusted equipment, and disorganised storage of raw food items. Labelling defects were also noted on packaged products. As a result, 720 kg of curd was discarded due to contamination, fungal infestation, and spoilage. Additionally, 1,700 kg of curd was seized over labelling violations and suspicions of substandard quality. Reportedly, samples have been collected for laboratory analysis, and further action will be taken in accordance with the Food Safety and Standards (FSS) Act, 2006, and FSS Rules and Regulations, 2011.
A detailed post was shared on the official handle of the Commissioner of Food Safety.
Take a look at the post:
Many took to the comments section to voice their concern.
A user noted, “There are many such plants in old city where inspection team never dares to enter.”
Another added, “Why doesn't the Government seal the factory permanently....and cancel the license”
A third wrote, “We Indians don't pay attention to small things,... now, after eating all this fake food, even our stomachs have gotten used to it... what can we do? The government doesn't give strict punishment to such people. We are the ones suffering. What can we do? Everyone is getting money... both of them are doing well in India.” ghee adulteration contamination mosquitoes houseflies seizure sample_collection alleged Jangaon, Telangana, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant mosquitoes presence of pests such as houseflies and mosquitoes in stored ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant houseflies presence of pests such as houseflies and mosquitoes in stored ghee curd fflo:hasAdulterant fungus 720 kg of curd was discarded due to contamination, fungal infestation Sanitary breaches at Shakti Milk and Milk Products fflo:foundAtStep Processing handlers were not adhering to adequate sanitary measures during processing pests in stored ghee fflo:foundAtStep Storage presence of pests such as houseflies and mosquitoes in stored ghee136:Tde9,Telangana dairy inspection reveals contaminated ghee, dead lizard near food deccanchronicle.com Shakti Dairy in Jangaon flagged for major food safety violations
An inspection at a leading dairy shop in Telangana's Jangaon district took food safety officials by surprise on Saturday when they found ghee stored within its premises to be infested with mosquitoes and houseflies.
In a recent inspection conducted on February 1, 2025, the State-level Task Force team identified multiple critical violations at Shakti Milk and Milk Products in Raghunathpally Mandal, Jangaon district. The Commissioner of Food Safety, Telangana, reported that food handlers were not adhering to adequate sanitary measures during processing and handling. The inspection revealed structural issues, including a patchy roof and floor in the cold storage room and the presence of pests such as houseflies and mosquitoes in stored ghee. A dead lizard was found near food articles, and spider webs were observed on the roof.
Pest control records and water analysis reports were unavailable. Equipment used in the dairy was found to be unclean, rusted, and unsterilized. Raw food items were stored in a haphazard manner, and certain labeling defects were observed on packed products. The inspection led to the discarding of 720 kg of curd due to contamination, fungal infestation, and spoilage. Additionally, 1,700 kg of curd was seized due to labeling violations and suspicion of substandard quality.
Headquartered at Jangaon, Shakti Milk and Milk Products, also known as Shakti Dairy, is one of Telangana's leading suppliers of dairy products, selling 40,000 litres of milk and yogurt daily across the state, including Hyderabad, according to the dairy's website.
Samples were collected for laboratory analysis, and further action will be taken as per the provisions of the Food Safety and Standards (FSS) Act, 2006, and the FSS Rules and Regulations, 2011.
The shocking revelations during the inspection have raised concerns about food safety and hygiene in the region. Authorities have assured strict action against violations and emphasized the importance of maintaining proper sanitary conditions in food processing units. Consumers have been urged to remain cautious and report any suspected malpractices to food safety authorities. ghee contamination adulteration mosquitoes houseflies inspection sample collection alleged Jangaon, Telangana, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant mosquitoes ghee stored within its premises to be infested with mosquitoes ghee fflo:hasAdulterant houseflies ghee stored within its premises to be infested with mosquitoes and houseflies milk fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy suppliers of dairy products, selling 40,000 litres of milk yogurt fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy suppliers of dairy products, selling 40,000 litres of milk and yogurt laboratory analysis fso:isPerformedOn Samples Samples were collected for laboratory analysis curd fflo:hasAdulterant fungus discarding of 720 kg of curd due to contamination, fungal infestation Shakti Dairy inspection finding fflo:foundAtStep Processing food handlers were not adhering to adequate sanitary measures during processing ghee infestation finding fflo:foundAtStep Storage ghee stored within its premises to be infested with mosquitoes and houseflies Shakti Dairy inspection finding fflo:triggeredAction Seizure of 1700 kg curd 1,700 kg of curd was seized due to labeling violations Shakti Dairy inspection finding fflo:triggeredAction Discarding of 720 kg curd inspection led to the discarding of 720 kg of curd137:Tbd4,Telangana: Houseflies in ghee; dead lizard, spider web, and patchy roof found during inspection at dairy product unit | Today News livemint.com Telangana: Houseflies in ghee; dead lizard, spider web, and patchy roof found during inspection at dairy product unit
A recent inspection at Shakti Milk and Milk Products in Jangaon, Telangana revealed severe food safety violations, including pests, unclean equipment, and improper storage. 720 kg of curd was discarded due to contamination, while 1,700 kg was seized for labeling issues. Further action is pending.
Houseflies and mosquitoes in stored ghee, dead lizard near food items and spider webs on roof were observed during an inspection at a dairy product storage facility in Jangaon, Commissioner of Food Safety, Telangana said on Sunday, February 2.
The State level Task Force team had carried out inspections at a dairy unit owned by Shakti Milk and Milk Products in Jangaon on Saturday. The inspection team found unclean, rusted and unsterilised equipment and improper storage of raw items.
The inspection at dairy product unit in Telangana revealed massive violation of food safety norms. The dairy products and raw materials were also kept in unhygienic conditions.
“720 kg Curd discarded due to contamination, fungal infestation and spoilage. Additionally, 1,700 kg Curd seized due to labelling violations and suspicion of substandard quality,” read a post by Commissioner of Food Safety, Telangana on X.
No pest control, water testing
The establishment failed to produce recent pest control records and water analysis reports during inspection. There were labelling defects in packed food items found at the unit. The inspection team had collected food samples from the Shakti Milk and Milk Products unit and has sent them for further investigation. Action on the dairy product manufacturer will be taken as per provisions of FSS Act, 2006 and FSS Rules and Regulations, 2011.
Telangana's Commissioner of Food Safety conducted inspections at dairy Durga Dairy Products units located in Hyderabad on December 20. The inspection uncovered multiple heygiene violations.
The inspectors found ceilings flaky in cold storage area. The unit also lacked proper drainage systems and expired food items were stored at the unit. Several raw materials used in it were also expired. The unit discovered expired artificial flavouring items like vanilla, lemon, etc. The doors of the unit were not closed properly hinting at the presence of pest inside unit. ghee contamination houseflies mosquitoes inspection sample collection alleged Jangaon, Telangana, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant houseflies Houseflies and mosquitoes in stored ghee spider webs fflo:foundAt Storage spider webs on roof were observed during an inspection at a dairy product storage facility Curd fflo:hasAdulterant Fungal infestation 720 kg Curd discarded due to contamination, fungal infestation and spoilage Durga Dairy Products fflo:foundAt Hyderabad dairy Durga Dairy Products units located in Hyderabad138:T1943,25 tons of adulterated ghee seized in this city: 8 ways to identify fake ghee - The Times of India indiatimes.com Ghee, also known as clarified butter, is a staple in many Indian households and is highly valued in Ayurveda for its medicinal properties, believed to promote digestion, boost immunity, and nourish the skin and hair. 
It is an excellent source of fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E, and K, which are essential for bone health, immunity, and skin nourishment. Ghee is also known for aiding digestion by stimulating the secretion of digestive enzymes and promoting gut health due to its butyric acid content. But, what if the ghee you are using is made with vegetable fat, fatty acid mono, and diglycerides and can lead to major health issues? Well, 25 tons of such adulterated ghee was recently seized in Surat. Scroll down to read the details and how one can identify fake ghee.
As per reports, the State Monitoring Cell (SMC) raided a factory in Masma, GIDC Olpad, Surat, and seized 25 tons of adulterated âpure ghee.â As per reports, two arrests have been made in this case. It has also been reported that the officials have seized 496 boxes of adulterated cow ghee, valued at Rs 23.84 lakh, essence and other raw materials worth Rs 69.67 lakh, machinery valued at Rs 16.59 lakh, packing materials worth Rs 7.55 lakh, and two mobile phones.
 The total value of the seized materials amounts to Rs 1.17 crore.
The primary investigation revealed that the accused used to supply packed ghee to Maharashtra and Rajasthan.They sold the adulterated ghee under the brand names Shubh Cow Ghee, Labh Cow Ghee, Oreo Cow Ghee, and Savro Cow Ghee. And during the investigation officials found empty boxes labelled with the brand names Dharti, Radhe, and Krishna.
The officials also seized essence and a mixture of vegetable fat, fatty acid mono, and diglycerides, which were used to manufacture the adulterated ghee. And the samples of these raw materials have been sent for forensic examination.
While adulteration of ghee and other edible items has become quite common, it is important for the masses to take extra care while buying foods. Here are a few tips and tricks one can follow while buying ghee and identify fake ghee.
Appearance and texture: Traditionally, ghee in its purest form has a golden color, rich and creamy texture. When held against light it should appear translucent and clear. The pale color of ghee could be indicative of preservatives and one should avoid it.
Packaging and label: It is important to pay special attention to the packaging and label of ghee products. A genuine ghee brand will have all major certificates of regulation compliances on it. The license number, date of packaging, expiry should be thoroughly checked before buying ghee. 
Aroma and flavor: Naturally, ghee has a nutty flavor and a smooth consistency. The ghee should never smell burnt as it has a high heating point. The burnt smell could be because of the presence of water or addons. Hence, such ghee should be avoided at all costs.
While one can judge the ghee using the above-mentioned criteria before buying it, there are also other ways by which you can ensure that the ghee you are consuming is beneficial.
Palm test: Simply, pour frozen ghee on your palm and if it starts melting instantly then the ghee is pure. Else, it is not and such ghee should be avoided.
Boil test: Simply boil the ghee and remember that ghee has a higher heating point so if it starts smelling as burnt then you know it is not pure ghee. Bubbles and steam when boiling the ghee are also indicative of adulterated ghee. After you have boiled the ghee, refrigerate it in a jar. If you see layers forming in the jar there is a presence of some other oil too in the ghee, this helps in better understanding the purity.
Water test: Fill a glass of normal water at room temperature, add ghee to it, if the ghee floats it is unadulterated and if it sinks then the ghee is infused with foreign material. 
Salt test: Add a pinch of Hyaluronic acid and tablespoon of salt to two spoons of ghee , after 20 minutes check the color of the ghee. If the ghee has turned red it means it is adulterated.
Iodine test: Add two drops of iodine solution to ghee if it turns purple then the ghee has a presence of starch in it.
Thumb and Embed Images Courtesy: istock ghee adulteration seizure pending_test India, Surat ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable fat ghee you are using is made with vegetable fat ghee fflo:hasAdulterant fatty acid mono and diglycerides ghee you are using is made with vegetable fat, fatty acid mono, and diglycerides ghee fflo:hasAdulterant diglycerides ghee you are using is made with vegetable fat, fatty acid mono, and diglycerides Seizure of 25 tons of adulterated ghee fflo:inRegion Surat 25 tons of such adulterated ghee was recently seized in Surat ghee fflo:hasAdulterant fatty acid mono mixture of vegetable fat, fatty acid mono, and diglycerides, which were used to manufacture the adulterated ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant diglycerides mixture of vegetable fat, fatty acid mono, and diglycerides, which were used to manufacture the adulterated ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant preservatives pale color of ghee could be indicative of preservatives ghee fflo:hasAdulterant other oil presence of some other oil too in the ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable fat mixture of vegetable fat... used to manufacture the adulterated ghee SensoryTest fflo:producesIndicator pale color The pale color of ghee could be indicative of preservatives SensoryTest fflo:producesIndicator golden color ghee in its purest form has a golden color SensoryTest fflo:producesIndicator translucent and clear When held against light it should appear translucent and clear Palm test fflo:producesIndicator melting instantly if it starts melting instantly then the ghee is pure Boil test fflo:producesIndicator burnt smell if it starts smelling as burnt then you know it is not pure ghee Boil test fflo:producesIndicator bubbles and steam Bubbles and steam when boiling the ghee are also indicative of adulterated ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant water The burnt smell could be because of the presence of water Water test fflo:producesIndicator ghee floats if the ghee floats it is unadulterated Water test fflo:producesIndicator ghee sinks if it sinks then the ghee is infused with foreign material Salt test fflo:producesIndicator ghee turns red If the ghee has turned red it means it is adulterated139:T1eef,Brothers caught running spurious ghee racket in Olpad | Surat News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Surat: The state monitoring cell of Gujarat Police raided two factories, run by a pair of brothers, that were allegedly making spurious ghee, in an industrial estate in the Olpad area of Surat district on Saturday. 
Police arrested the two brothers and seized suspected spurious ghee worth Rs 24 lakh and Rs 70 lakh worth of raw material. The food and drug control authority joined the operation to test the quality of the ghee and the raw material. 
Based on specific information, the SMC raided the manufacturing units Veer Milk Products and RK Enterprises inside Honey Industrial Estate at Masma. Police arrested the owners of these units, Rakesh and Bhupesh Bhartiya, for allegedly running the racket. 
The investigation revealed that the accused used palm oil and harmful chemicals to make a product that looked and smelled like ghee. At their units, police found machinery worth Rs 16.59 lakh and packaging material worth Rs 7.55 lakh. 
Police will send samples of the seized products to the Forensic Science Laboratory (FSL) for testing. 
A case has been registered at Olpad police station under Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita Sections 318 (deceiving another person to cause harm to their body), 274 (adulteration of food), (sale of noxious food) and others. The brothers have also been booked under the Food Safety and Standards Act. 
The ghee was being sold as "Shub Brandh Cow Ghee". Both units, located opposite each other, were found to be using ghee essence, vegetable fat and fatty acid mono and diglycerides in their production. The other owners of both firms are family members. 
They divided the processing of palm oil, manufacturing of the spurious âghee' and its storage, to reduce the risk of getting caught. 
"They used chemicals that gave the texture and fragrance of ghee to the palm oil mixture. Once ready, it is difficult even for regular users to make out that the ghee is spurious," said a police officer. 
Both accused have offences registered against them in Sirohi and Barmer in Rajasthan. 
Surat: The state monitoring cell of Gujarat Police raided two factories, run by a pair of brothers, that were allegedly making spurious ghee, in an industrial estate in the Olpad area of Surat district on Saturday. 
Police arrested the two brothers and seized suspected spurious ghee worth Rs 24 lakh and Rs 70 lakh worth of raw material. The food and drug control authority joined the operation to test the quality of the ghee and the raw material. 
Based on specific information, the SMC raided the manufacturing units Veer Milk Products and RK Enterprises inside Honey Industrial Estate at Masma. Police arrested the owners of these units, Rakesh and Bhupesh Bhartiya, for allegedly running the racket. 
The investigation revealed that the accused used palm oil and harmful chemicals to make a product that looked and smelled like ghee. At their units, police found machinery worth Rs 16.59 lakh and packaging material worth Rs 7.55 lakh. 
Police will send samples of the seized products to the Forensic Science Laboratory (FSL) for testing. 
A case has been registered at Olpad police station under Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita Sections 318 (deceiving another person to cause harm to their body), 274 (adulteration of food), (sale of noxious food) and others. The brothers have also been booked under the Food Safety and Standards Act. 
The ghee was being sold as "Shub Brandh Cow Ghee". Both units, located opposite each other, were found to be using ghee essence, vegetable fat and fatty acid mono and diglycerides in their production. The other owners of both firms are family members. 
They divided the processing of palm oil, manufacturing of the spurious âghee' and its storage, to reduce the risk of getting caught. 
"They used chemicals that gave the texture and fragrance of ghee to the palm oil mixture. Once ready, it is difficult even for regular users to make out that the ghee is spurious," said a police officer. 
Both accused have offences registered against them in Sirohi and Barmer in Rajasthan. 
Check out the latest news about Delhi Elections 2025, including key constituencies such as Chandni Chowk, New Delhi, Kalkaji, Jangpura, Patparganj, Rohini, Rajinder Nagar, Greater Kailash, Okhla, and Dwarka. ghee adulteration seizure arrest testing suspected Surat, Gujarat, India, Olpad, Surat, Gujarat ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil accused used palm oil and harmful chemicals to make a product that looked and smelled like ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant harmful chemicals accused used palm oil and harmful chemicals to make a product that looked and smelled like ghee palm oil fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee used palm oil and harmful chemicals to make a product that looked and smelled like ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil They divided the processing of palm oil, manufacturing of the spurious âghee' ghee fflo:hasAdulterant ghee essence using ghee essence, vegetable fat and fatty acid mono and diglycerides ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable fat using ghee essence, vegetable fat and fatty acid mono and diglycerides ghee fflo:hasAdulterant fatty acid mono and diglycerides using ghee essence, vegetable fat and fatty acid mono and diglycerides ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil accused used palm oil and harmful chemicals to make a product that looked and smelled like ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant harmful chemicals used palm oil and harmful chemicals to make a product that looked and smelled like ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant ghee essence using ghee essence, vegetable fat and fatty acid mono and diglycerides in their production ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable fat using ghee essence, vegetable fat and fatty acid mono and diglycerides in their production ghee fflo:hasAdulterant fatty acid mono and diglycerides using ghee essence, vegetable fat and fatty acid mono and diglycerides in their production ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil processing of palm oil, manufacturing of the spurious âghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod adding chemicals to palm oil mixture used chemicals that gave the texture and fragrance of ghee to the palm oil mixture palm oil fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee processing of palm oil, manufacturing of the spurious âghee Spurious Ghee Adulteration Act prov:wasAssociatedWith Rakesh Bhartiya Police arrested the owners of these units, Rakesh and Bhupesh Bhartiya, for allegedly running the racket. Spurious Ghee Adulteration Act prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhupesh Bhartiya Police arrested the owners of these units, Rakesh and Bhupesh Bhartiya, for allegedly running the racket. Spurious Ghee Adulteration Method fflo:hasFraudType Substitution manufacturing of the spurious âghee' Spurious Ghee Production Method fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional to reduce the risk of getting caught Spurious Ghee Adulteration Act prov:wasAssociatedWith Rakesh Bhartiya Police arrested the owners of these units, Rakesh and Bhupesh Bhartiya, for allegedly running the racket. Spurious Ghee Adulteration Act prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhupesh Bhartiya Police arrested the owners of these units, Rakesh and Bhupesh Bhartiya, for allegedly running the racket. Spurious Ghee Adulteration Act prov:used ghee used palm oil and harmful chemicals to make a product that looked and smelled like ghee palm oil fflo:foundAt Veer Milk Products accused used palm oil and harmful chemicals to make a product Spurious Ghee Adulteration Act prov:wasAssociatedWith RK Enterprises raided the manufacturing units Veer Milk Products and RK Enterprises adding chemicals to palm oil mixture fflo:hasFraudType Substitution manufacturing of the spurious âghee adding chemicals to palm oil mixture fflo:hasFraudType Masking gave the texture and fragrance of ghee to the palm oil mixture adding chemicals to palm oil mixture fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional to reduce the risk of getting caught13a:T8d1,Ludhiana: Seized by health officials, ghee, oil ‘stolen’; three booked hindustantimes.com Ludhiana: Seized by health officials, ghee, oil ‘stolen’; three booked
The complainant said a health team conducted a raid at the unit in Panchsheel Vihar, Barewal; the team found adulterated desi ghee, vanaspati ghee and soyabean refined oil and seized the material
Employees of a ghee and edible oil manufacturing unit have been booked for allegedly stealing material seized by the health department. Adulterated ghee and soyabean refined oil seized by health department was kept on the premises of the unit, officials said.
The accused have been identified as Anmol Thapar of Gobind Colony of Jagraon, his brother Abhishek Thapar and aide Manu of Kila Mohalla. The FIR has been registered on the statement of food safety officer Dr Tarun Bansal.
The complainant said a health team conducted a raid at the unit in Panchsheel Vihar, Barewal. The team found adulterated desi ghee, vanaspati ghee and soyabean refined oil and seized the material.
Bansal added that they found that the accused had stolen the seized material and disposed it of. ASI Ashwani Kumar, who is investigating the case, said an FIR under Sections 186, 201 and 380 of the IPC has been registered against the accused. A hunt is on for their arrest. ghee adulteration seizure alleged India, Panchsheel Vihar, Barewal Adulteration of desi ghee, vanaspati ghee, and soyabean refined oil prov:wasAssociatedWith Anmol Thapar The accused have been identified as Anmol Thapar Adulteration of desi ghee, vanaspati ghee, and soyabean refined oil prov:wasAssociatedWith Abhishek Thapar his brother Abhishek Thapar and aide Manu Adulteration of desi ghee, vanaspati ghee, and soyabean refined oil prov:wasAssociatedWith Manu aide Manu of Kila Mohalla desi ghee fflo:hasAdulterant unspecified adulterant found adulterated desi ghee Adulterated desi ghee, vanaspati ghee and soyabean refined oil found prov:wasAttributedTo Dr Tarun Bansal FIR has been registered on the statement of food safety officer Dr Tarun Bansal Incident finding of adulterated ghee and oil fflo:triggeredAction FIR registration under IPC Sections 186, 201, 380 FIR under Sections 186, 201 and 380 of the IPC has been registered13b:T1d84,How eating adulterated ghee affects health indianexpress.com Ghee, a staple in many households, is revered for its rich flavour and numerous health benefits. However, in the past few days, the food product has been getting a bad name, especially since claims of the ghee used in Tirupati laddoos is said to be contaminated with beef tallow.
Adulterated ghee often contains harmful substances that can have serious consequences for your well-being. According to Dr Rakesh Gupta, Senior Consultant of Internal Medicine at Indraprastha Apollo Hospitals, consuming adulterated ghee can lead to both short-term and long-term health issues, some of which are severe.
Common adulterants in ghee
Adulteration of ghee typically involves the addition of cheaper substances to increase profit margins. Common adulterants, according to Dr Gupta, include:
- Vegetable oils: Low-cost oils such as palm oil are often mixed into ghee.
- Animal fats: In some cases, non-edible animal fats are used to mimic the texture of ghee.
- Synthetic additives: Harmful chemicals like paraffin wax or even detergents are used to enhance consistency and appearance.
These adulterants not only degrade the nutritional value of ghee but also introduce toxins into the body, posing serious health risks.
Dr Nishant Singh, Senior Consultant, Department of Internal Medicine, Yatharth Super Speciality Hospital, Noida Extension, explained that adulterants such as hydrogenated fats can contain harmful chemicals and preservatives that negatively affect health. Some products may also be contaminated with heavy metals, which can accumulate in the body and lead to severe health problems, including kidney damage and neurological disorders.
 The row started after Andhra CM Chandrababu Naidu alleged that animal tallow was found in ghee used to make the Prasad at the temple and his party cited a report from NDDB as the basis for the claim. (File Photo)
What happens if you eat adulterated ghee?
Dr Gupta and Dr Singh explained what the short-term effects of eating adulterated ghee are:
- Digestive Issues: Adulterated ghee can cause acute digestive problems such as nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal discomfort. The body struggles to process synthetic additives or non-edible substances, leading to gastrointestinal distress, Dr Singh explained.
- Toxin Exposure: Harmful chemicals used in adulteration, such as paraffin wax or detergents, can introduce toxins into the body. These toxins may cause irritation to the digestive tract and could lead to more severe complications with prolonged exposure.
- Allergic Reactions: For individuals with sensitivities or allergies, adulterated ghee may trigger reactions ranging from skin rashes to more severe respiratory issues.
Long-term health consequences
- Liver Damage: Continuous consumption of adulterated ghee can put a strain on the liver, which is responsible for detoxifying harmful substances. Over time, this can result in liver damage or even conditions like fatty liver disease.
- Cardiovascular Issues: Ghee is known for its healthy fats when consumed in moderation. However, when adulterated with unhealthy fats or oils, it can elevate bad cholesterol (LDL) levels, increasing the risk of heart disease, high blood pressure, and strokes, Dr Gupta said.
- Nutrient Malabsorption: Adulterants in ghee can disrupt the body’s ability to absorb essential nutrients. This can lead to malnutrition and deficiencies in vital vitamins and minerals, even if the diet appears balanced, Dr Singh said.
- Hormonal Imbalances: Certain chemicals used in adulterated ghee can interfere with hormone production and regulation. Over time, this may lead to metabolic disruptions, weight gain, or hormonal disorders like thyroid imbalances.
How to Identify Adulterated Ghee
Spotting adulterated ghee can be challenging, but here are some common signs:
Story continues below this ad
- Unusual texture: Adulterated ghee may have an unusually greasy or waxy texture.
- Strong or artificial smell: Genuine ghee has a distinct, pleasant aroma. If it smells too strong or artificial, it could be adulterated.
- Changes in color: Pure ghee has a consistent golden-yellow color. If the color appears uneven or off, it may indicate adulteration.
To avoid the risks associated with adulterated ghee, Dr Gupta advises purchasing ghee from reputable brands that follow strict quality control measures. Look for certifications such as FSSAI (Food Safety and Standards Authority of India) or similar regulatory bodies in your region. Additionally, be mindful of the price—extremely cheap ghee is often a red flag for adulteration.
DISCLAIMER: This article is based on information from the public domain and/or the experts we spoke to. Always consult your health practitioner before starting any routine. ghee adulteration alleged alleged India, Tirupati ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil Low-cost oils such as palm oil are often mixed into ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fats non-edible animal fats are used to mimic the texture of ghee heavy metals fflo:causesEffect kidney damage contaminated with heavy metals, which can accumulate in the body and lead to severe health problems, including kidney damage heavy metals fflo:causesEffect neurological disorders contaminated with heavy metals, which can accumulate in the body and lead to severe health problems, including kidney damage and neurological disorders animal tallow fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee alleged that animal tallow was found in ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal tallow alleged that animal tallow was found in ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant paraffin wax Harmful chemicals like paraffin wax or even detergents are used ghee fflo:hasAdulterant detergents Harmful chemicals like paraffin wax or even detergents are used adulterated ghee fflo:causesEffect nausea Adulterated ghee can cause acute digestive problems such as nausea adulterated ghee fflo:causesEffect diarrhea Adulterated ghee can cause acute digestive problems such as... diarrhea adulterated ghee fflo:causesEffect skin rashes adulterated ghee may trigger reactions ranging from skin rashes adulterated ghee fflo:causesEffect respiratory issues adulterated ghee may trigger reactions ranging from skin rashes to more severe respiratory issues adulterated ghee fflo:causesEffect liver damage Continuous consumption of adulterated ghee can put a strain on the liver... result in liver damage adulterated ghee fflo:causesEffect heart disease increasing the risk of heart disease, high blood pressure, and strokes adulterated ghee fflo:causesEffect high blood pressure increasing the risk of heart disease, high blood pressure, and strokes adulterated ghee fflo:causesEffect strokes increasing the risk of heart disease, high blood pressure, and strokes Adulterants in ghee fflo:causesEffect malnutrition Adulterants in ghee can disrupt the body's ability to absorb essential nutrients. This can lead to malnutrition adulterated ghee fflo:causesEffect hormonal disorders lead to metabolic disruptions, weight gain, or hormonal disorders like thyroid imbalances adulterated ghee fflo:causesEffect thyroid imbalances hormonal disorders like thyroid imbalances SensoryTest fflo:producesIndicator unusually greasy or waxy texture Adulterated ghee may have an unusually greasy or waxy texture. SensoryTest fflo:producesIndicator Strong or artificial smell Strong or artificial smell: Genuine ghee has a distinct, pleasant aroma. ghee fflo:hasAdulterant adulterant If the color appears uneven or off, it may indicate adulteration.13c:T153d,Major crackdown on adulterated ghee and oil in Pokaran over 14000kg seized timesofindia.indiatimes.com JAISALMER: In a major action under the Rajasthan Government’s “Shuddh Aahar Milawat Par Vaar” campaign, authorities raided an illegal adulterated ghee and oil manufacturing unit in Pokaran late Sunday night and seized more than 14,000 kilograms of adulterated ghee and edible oil. 
The operation is being described as the largest crackdown on the fake ghee and oil trade in Jaisalmer district so far.
A special team from the Food Safety Department headquarters in Jaipur conducted a surprise raid at a residential property in Lodha Colony, Pokaran, where adulterated ghee and oil were being manufactured and packaged on a large scale. 
During the operation, officials collected 13 samples for testing and seized over 14,000 kilograms of suspected adulterated products.
The main accused reportedly fled from the spot before the raid. However, two workers found at the premises were detained and questioned. Investigators suspect the operation may be linked to a larger syndicate involved in the adulterated food business, with possible additional warehouses operating in Pokaran and nearby rural areas.
Confirming the action, Chief Medical and Health Officer (CMHO) Jaisalmer, Dr. 
Rajendra Kumar Paliwal, said the raid was carried out under the directions of Food Safety Commissioner Dr. T. Shubhamangala Rajasthan and under the leadership of Additional Commissioner (Food Safety) Bhagwat Singh, in coordination with the Jaisalmer health department.
Acting on specific intelligence, the team raided a premises belonging to Yogesh Tavari, owner of Satvik Trading Company, in Lodha Colony. Officials discovered large-scale manufacturing and packaging activities involving adulterated ghee and edible oils.
During the raid, five samples of adulterated ghee and oil were collected under the provisions of the Food Safety and Standards Act (FSS Act). Authorities seized approximately 10,260 kilograms of adulterated ghee, palm oil, soybean oil, and vanaspati from the site.
Subsequently, a raid was conducted at the company’s warehouse, where officials collected eight additional samples of adulterated ghee sold under various brands, including Aahar, Shubh, Kuber, Shrimool, Vinayak, and Topper Milk Fat. Around 4,000 kilograms of adulterated ghee were seized from the warehouse.
Officials stated that the case appears to involve large-scale food adulteration that poses a serious threat to public health.
The operation was carried out by Jaipur-based Food Safety Officers Vinod Sharma, Devendra Singh, Lokesh Sharma, and Jagdish Prasad, along with Jaisalmer Food Safety Officer Kishanaram Kadwasara.
According to Kadwasara, all ghee and oil samples have been sent to the Jaipur laboratory for analysis. Further action under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 will be initiated once the laboratory reports are received.
Authorities also recovered around 650 tins containing palm oil, soybean oil, and vanaspati ghee. In addition, iron containers, raw chemical materials, and modern sealing machines used for packaging were seized from the premises.
The Jaipur headquarters had received information that adulterated ghee and oil were being manufactured and supplied to markets on a large scale from Pokaran. When the special team arrived at the house in Lodha Colony, they found the main gate locked from the outside to avoid suspicion. However, upon entering the premises, officials discovered two workers actively engaged in packaging adulterated ghee and oil.
The investigation is ongoing, and officials are exploring possible links to a wider network involved in the production and distribution of adulterated food products across the region. ghee edible oil palm oil soybean oil vanaspati adulteration surprise raid seizure detention suspected Pokaran, Jaisalmer, Rajasthan, India surprise raid fflo:issuedBy Food Safety Department headquarters in Jaipur A special team from the Food Safety Department headquarters in Jaipur conducted a surprise raid adulteration of ghee and edible oils prov:wasAssociatedWith Yogesh Tavari Acting on specific intelligence, the team raided a premises belonging to Yogesh Tavari, owner of Satvik Trading Company, in Lodha Colony. Officials discovered large-scale manufacturing and packaging activities involving adulterated ghee and edible oils. analysis of ghee and oil samples fso:isPerformedAt Jaipur laboratory all ghee and oil samples have been sent to the Jaipur laboratory for analysis analysis of ghee and oil samples fso:isPerformedAt Jaipur laboratory all ghee and oil samples have been sent to the Jaipur laboratory for analysis manufacturing and packaging of adulterated ghee and oil prov:wasAssociatedWith illegal adulterated ghee and oil manufacturing unit in Pokaran adulterated ghee and oil were being manufactured and packaged 13 samples fflo:collectedAt Processing officials collected 13 samples for testing surprise raid fflo:targets ghee raided an illegal adulterated ghee and oil manufacturing unit surprise raid fflo:targets edible oil raided an illegal adulterated ghee and oil manufacturing unit adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt Processing discovered large-scale manufacturing and packaging activities involving adulterated ghee Food Safety and Standards Act fflo:appliesToFood edible oils collected under the provisions of the Food Safety and Standards Act (FSS Act)13d:T12ca,Punjab &amp; Haryana high court asks Centre if they plan to open more labs to check cooking oil adulteration hindustantimes.com Punjab & Haryana high court asks Centre if they plan to open more labs to check cooking oil adulteration
The court was hearing a 2015 public interest litigation (PIL) by a Kapurthala resident Rajesh Gupta
The Punjab and Haryana high court (HC) has directed the Centre to apprise the court whether it has plans to open more laboratories to check adulteration of miscible oil in cooking oils available in the market.
Also Read: Adulterated mustard oil behind 3 dropsy deaths in Nabha: report
The HC bench of chief justice Sheel Nagu and justice Anil Kshetarpal termed it “unfortunate” that despite edible oils of different types being consumed in very large quantities throughout the country, the nearest laboratory to conduct the aforesaid test is situated nearly 1,500 kms from Chandigarh, in Nagpur.
Also Read: Delhi govt to intensify checks on food adulteration amid festive season
The court was hearing a 2015 public interest litigation (PIL) by a Kapurthala resident Rajesh Gupta, who had alleged that wholesale dealers, oil millers and wholesale traders in the trade of edible mustard oil were playing havoc with the lives of the people and providing ‘poison in the form of food’ which was not fit for human consumption by blatantly ignoring provisions of the Food Safety Act. “… various firms in Punjab were selling adulterated mustard oil by labelling it as ‘pure refined mustard oil’ which could be sold in the market for human consumption. Some firms were selling ‘refined rice bran oil’ as ‘mustard oil’ in order to deceive the public and maximise profits,” he had submitted, further alleging that the millers were working in violation of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006, and even Agmark, a certification mark, was being misused by traders in violation of the Act.
Also Read: Gautam Budh Nagar: 370 kg sweets, 750 ltr oil seized in food safety checks
During the course of the PIL, some samples were sent for examination to the Regional Agmark Laboratory, Amritsar. However, the lab said that the tests for other miscible oil as possible adulterants and percentage thereof were not performed as there was no availability of required facilities in this laboratory. For the same, samples can be sent to Central Agmark Laboratory, Nagpur, for analysis.
Additional solicitor general Satya Pal Jain, who was asked to check where samples could be sent, had told the court that the nearest laboratory where the test for other miscible oil can be conducted is the Central Agmark Laboratory, Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, North Ambajari Road, Nagpur.
The court expressed its displeasure over the lab being 1,500 km away from Chandigarh and asked Jain to apprise the court by January 22 as to what is the present policy of the central government and whether there is proposal for opening other laboratories across the country and if not then why. cooking oil miscible oil adulteration miscible oil Directive to Centre on lab expansion suspected Chandigarh, Punjab, India cooking oils fflo:hasAdulterant miscible oil check adulteration of miscible oil in cooking oils test for other miscible oil fso:isPerformedAt Central Agmark Laboratory nearest laboratory where the test for other miscible oil can be conducted is the Central Agmark Laboratory test for other miscible oil fso:isPerformedAt Central Agmark Laboratory test for other miscible oil can be conducted is the Central Agmark Laboratory miscible oil fflo:detectedBy test for other miscible oil test for other miscible oil can be conducted cooking oils fflo:belongsToCategory Oils edible oils of different types being consumed Directive to Centre on lab expansion fflo:issuedBy Punjab & Haryana High Court Punjab and Haryana high court (HC) has directed the Centre to apprise the court whether it has plans to open more laboratories PIL alleging mustard oil adulteration fflo:foundIn mustard oil selling adulterated mustard oil refined rice bran oil fflo:isSubstituteFor mustard oil selling 'refined rice bran oil' as 'mustard oil' PIL alleging mustard oil adulteration fflo:inRegion Punjab various firms in Punjab were selling adulterated mustard oil PIL alleging mustard oil adulteration fflo:foundAtStep Retail wholesale dealers, oil millers and wholesale traders selling refined rice bran oil as mustard oil fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling selling 'refined rice bran oil' as 'mustard oil' selling refined rice bran oil as mustard oil fflo:hasFraudType Substitution selling 'refined rice bran oil' as 'mustard oil' Analysis of mustard oil samples fso:isPerformedAt Regional Agmark Laboratory, Amritsar samples were sent for examination to the Regional Agmark Laboratory, Amritsar13e:Tfcf,Hc Questions Lack Of Local Testing Infra For Mustard Oil Adulteration | Chandigarh News - Times of India indiatimes.com Chandigarh: As cases of food adulteration rise, especially in edible oils, it is surprising that the region, including Punjab, Haryana, and Chandigarh, has no facility to check different parameters of adulteration in mustard oil. The nearest laboratory to check such parameters is in Nagpur, nearly 1,500 km from Chandigarh.
Taking note of this, the Punjab and Haryana high court has now asked the central govt to inform about its present policy and whether there is a proposal for opening other laboratories across the country, and if not, why.
Earlier in Oct this year, the HC, upon taking cognisance of the issue of adulteration of mustard oil, asked the registrar general of the HC to collect three samples of different popular brands and send them for quality testing to the nearest laboratory. Following the HC orders, the samples were sent to the Regional Agmark Laboratory, Amritsar.
When the matter came up for hearing before the HC on Dec 5, the HC was informed that the tests for other miscible oils as possible adulterants and their percentage were not performed due to the unavailability of required facilities in the laboratory at Amritsar. The court then asked for the nearest laboratory where such testing could be done.
During the hearing of the case again on Dec 11, Satya Pal Jain, additional solicitor general of India, after seeking instructions, informed that the nearest laboratory where the test for other miscible oils can be conducted is the Central Agmark Laboratory, Nagpur. âIt is unfortunate to note that despite edible oils of different types being consumed in very large quantities throughout the country, the nearest laboratory to conduct the aforesaid test is situated nearly 1,500 km from Chandigarh. This court will deal with this aspect at any subsequent hearing, but the additional solicitor general of India is directed to find out what the present policy of the central govt is and whether there is a proposal for opening other laboratories across the country, and if not, then why,â the HC directed after examining the issue.
In its order released on Friday, the division bench comprising Chief Justice Sheel Nagu and Justice Arun Khsetarpal also asked Jain to ensure that the test is conducted expeditiously, and a report is submitted before the next date of hearing. The matter has now been adjourned to Jan 22, 2025, for further hearing.
The HC ordered the sampling/testing of the mustard oil after hearing a large number of complaints received regarding the blending of mustard oil with other oils. mustard oil adulteration substitution other oils order to collect mustard oil samples for testing directive to find central govt policy suspected Chandigarh, Punjab and Haryana, India test for other miscible oils fso:isPerformedAt Central Agmark Laboratory, Nagpur nearest laboratory where the test for other miscible oils can be conducted is the Central Agmark Laboratory, Nagpur mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant other oils complaints received regarding the blending of mustard oil with other oils mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant miscible oils tests for other miscible oils as possible adulterants quality testing fso:isPerformedAt Regional Agmark Laboratory, Amritsar send them for quality testing to the nearest laboratory Punjab and Haryana high court fflo:issuedBy order to collect mustard oil samples for testing HC, upon taking cognisance of the issue of adulteration of mustard oil, asked the registrar general of the HC to collect three samples mustard oil fflo:belongsToCategory edible oils cases of food adulteration rise, especially in edible oils blending of mustard oil with other oils fflo:hasFraudType Dilution blending of mustard oil with other oils Central Agmark Laboratory, Nagpur fso:hasLocation Nagpur Central Agmark Laboratory, Nagpur HC directive to find central govt policy fflo:issuedBy Punjab and Haryana High Court the HC directed after examining the issue13f:Tb94,Dahod Police Bust Major Spurious Cooking Oil Racket, Seize Goods Worth Over Rs 15 Lakhs | Vadodara News - Times of India indiatimes.com Vadodara: After the discovery of a fake govt office and the forgery of non-agriculture land orders, a racket involving the sale of spurious cooking oil has emerged in Dahod. The special operations group (SOG) of Dahod police effected a major seizure of suspected spurious cooking oil from a unit at an industrial estate near the town. 
The raid on the unit at the Karedi GIDC industrial estate near Dahod was conducted by SOG sleuths after they received intelligence about the sale of spurious edible oil. The unit was raided and oil worth Rs 15.45 lakh was seized. 
The seizure included a large stock of suspected palm oil that was brought to the unit in a light commercial vehicle as well as stock stored at the unit. The vehicle was carrying 104 tins, weighing 1,505kg. 
The raiding party found stickers of 17 various different brands at the spot. Additionally, 456 pouches, 24 bottles, and 16 jerrycans of edible oil were found at the unit. Officials also found a 25,000-litre tank at the unit, containing about 10,000 litres of suspected palm oil. 
The value of items seized was estimated to be Rs 15.45 lakh. Food safety and other officials were informed of the find by police. Samples were taken for testing. One person, Murtua Zabuawala, was detained from the unit. 
Empty barrels of palm oil were also found at the site. The tins on the truck did not have any stickers. Police suspect palm oil or adulterated oil was being sold under the name of various cooking oil brands. cooking oil palm oil substitution mislabeling adulteration palm oil seizure detention suspected Dahod, Gujarat, India spurious cooking oil fflo:isSubstituteFor cooking oil suspected spurious cooking oil palm oil fflo:isSubstituteFor cooking oil Police suspect palm oil or adulterated oil was being sold under the name of various cooking oil brands. suspected palm oil fflo:foundAt Karedi GIDC industrial estate suspected palm oil that was brought to the unit Spurious Cooking Oil Labeling Method fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling found stickers of 17 various different brands at the spot suspected palm oil fflo:foundAt Processing seized of suspected spurious cooking oil from a unit AdulterationAct at Karedi GIDC unit prov:wasAssociatedWith Murtua Zabuawala One person, Murtua Zabuawala, was detained from the unit. Selling palm oil as branded cooking oil fflo:hasFraudType Substitution Police suspect palm oil or adulterated oil was being sold under the name of various cooking oil brands. Selling palm oil as branded cooking oil fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling Police suspect palm oil or adulterated oil was being sold under the name of various cooking oil brands. cooking oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod Selling palm oil as branded cooking oil Police suspect palm oil or adulterated oil was being sold under the name of various cooking oil brands.140:T89d,Investigation into Dropsy Deaths in Nabha: New Committee Formed to Probe Tainted Edible Oil | Chandigarh News - Times of India indiatimes.com Patiala: The Patiala deputy commissioner has constituted a five-member committee under Nabha SDM officer to scrutinise and take forward an earlier investigation by health officials into three dropsy deaths which took place in Nabha in Sep this year.
Chief minister field officer Navdeep Singh informed that the team under Nabha SDM Nabha also comprises Nabha DSP, district epidemiologist, Patiala civil surgeon, Nabha senior medical officer and deputy registrar of co-operative societies.
Three members of a family had died after consumption of unfit edible oil in Sept, after which the health department had issued an advisory and conducted a probe.
Navdeep Singh said the committee will now act after going through the health departmentâs investigation report. The new committee has been asked to send its inquiry report to the CMâs field officer within seven days.
During the probe, they found the affected family sourced mustard seeds from three places. They said adulteration was confirmed in oil samples tested in a lab. The affected family had extracted oil from raw seeds given to them by a religious devotee. Two women, aged 26 and 36, died in private hospitals, while a 72-year-old man passed away at home. 
The issue came to light when another family member, a 50-year-old woman, was admitted to PGI hospital in late Sept. tnn edible oil mustard oil adulteration substandard unfit edible oil advisory committee formation lab_confirmed Nabha, Patiala, Punjab, India advisory fflo:issuedBy health department health department had issued an advisory dropsy deaths in Nabha fflo:inRegion Nabha dropsy deaths which took place in Nabha unfit edible oil fflo:causesEffect dropsy dropsy deaths which took place dropsy fflo:hasEffectType fflo:AcuteEffect Three members of a family had died adulteration finding in mustard oil fflo:confirmedBy lab test result adulteration was confirmed in oil samples tested in a lab mustard oil fflo:outputOf oil extraction extracted oil from raw seeds mustard oil fkg:hasIngredient mustard seeds extracted oil from raw seeds141:T882,Adulteration of TTD ghee: SIT inspects AR Dairy newindianexpress.com VIJAYAWADA: In a significant turn of events in the probe into adulteration of cow ghee supplied to Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam’s (TTD) Laddu Prasadam, the Special Investigation Team (SIT) conducted inspections at AR Dairy Private Limited in Dindigul of Tamil Nadu, over the weekend.
The SIT team, comprising Deputy Superintendent of Police (DSPs), Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) officials, and sub-inspectors, arrived at the dairy on Saturday.
The inspection, which began at 12 noon, extended until 1.30 am on Sunday. As part of the investigation, a team of 11 officials scrutinised the dairy’s records, quality testing procedures, and documents related to the supply of cow ghee.
During the inspection, SIT officials reportedly questioned employees and gathered information about milk suppliers and the transport mechanism for cow ghee from the dairy to Tirumala. Various items, including account books, quality records, and other relevant documents, were seized for examination.
“The raid, which lasted over 14 hours, resulted in the seizure of documents related to the tender agreement between TTD and AR Dairy, ghee samples, transportation records, and testing certificates,” said a senior official.
Another team of officials simultaneously inspected a flour mill in Tirumala, where ghee is stored and tested before its use in Laddu Prasadam.
The team verified the ghee testing process to ensure compliance with quality standards. Sources revealed the probe is nearing completion. The probe report is expected to be ready within a week. ghee adulteration inspection seizure alleged Dindigul, Tamil Nadu, India Adulteration of cow ghee supplied to TTD prov:used cow ghee adulteration of cow ghee supplied to Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam’s (TTD) Laddu Prasadam Inspection at AR Dairy fflo:targets cow ghee scrutinised the dairy’s records, quality testing procedures, and documents related to the supply of cow ghee flour mill in Tirumala fflo:propagatesTo Laddu Prasadam production flour mill in Tirumala, where ghee is stored and tested before its use in Laddu Prasadam142:Ta09,SIT arrives in Tirupati to probe TTD ghee adulteration newindianexpress.com VIJAYAWADA: The Special Investigation Team (SIT), constituted by the Supreme Court to investigate alleged irregularities in the supply of substandard cow ghee and allegations of animal fat being used in the Laddu Prasadam at the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD), arrived in Tirupati on Friday.
According to sources, the team, including two officials from the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) and one from the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), along with other officials were appointed to assist the investigation. They were stationed at the Bhudevi Complex near Alipiri Link bus station in Tirupati.
It was also reported that the CBI officers held a meeting and formed four teams, each focusing on different aspects of the investigation into the alleged irregularities.
The four teams, led by a DSP, are tasked with gathering information from the TTD regarding the details of the ghee procurement tenders of AR Dairy Pvt Ltd, inspecting the ‘Potu’— a kitchen where Laddu Prasadam is prepared, laboratory, and stores office, and also visiting the dairy in question, located in Dindigul, Tamil Nadu.
However, the two State government-appointed officers, Guntur Range IG Sarvashresth Tripathi and Visakhapatnam DIG Gopinath Jatti, are yet to join the investigation.
Following the directions of TTD executive officer (EO) J Syamala Rao, a local office for the SIT was set up at the Bhudevi Complex to facilitate and coordinate the probe.
The Supreme Court had earlier instructed the CBI director, on October 4, to set up a five-member team comprising two officers each from the CBI and the State police, along with a senior official from FSSAI.
In line with these instructions, the CBI appointed Joint Director S Veeresh Prabhu and CBI-SP Murali Rambha, while the State government recommended IG Tripathi, DIG Gopinath Jatti, and FSSAI nominated Satya Kumar Panda for the SIT.
The probe will be supervised by the CBI director, and the SIT head is expected to submit a detailed report on the findings. ghee adulteration animal fat investigation alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India cow ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat alleged irregularities in the supply of substandard cow ghee and allegations of animal fat being used in the Laddu Prasadam Laddu Prasadam fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat allegations of animal fat being used in the Laddu Prasadam AR Dairy Pvt Ltd fflo:foundAt Dindigul, Tamil Nadu dairy in question, located in Dindigul, Tamil Nadu143:Tacd,Andhra Pradesh: CBI-led SIT team reaches Tirupati to probe into Tirumala laddu 'ghee adulteration' case | Vijayawada News - Times of India indiatimes.com TIRUPATI: The Central Bureau of Investigation-led special investigation team launched its probe into the laddu-ghee adulteration case on Friday.
On October 4, the Supreme Court of India ordered the constitution of a five-member SIT, comprising two officers from the CBI, two senior police officers from Andhra Pradesh, and one official from the FSSAI, to probe the laddu-ghee adulteration case reported at the world-renowned Tirumala temple.
While the CBI appointed S Veeresh Prabhu, Joint Director (Hyderabad), and Murali Rambha, CBI-SP (Visakhapatnam), the AP govt recommended Guntur IG Sarvashresth Tripathi and Visakhapatnam Range DIG Gopinath Jatti to the SIT, and FSSAI nominated Satya Kumar Panda to the SIT.
Meanwhile, the state govt of Andhra Pradesh has deputed a team of 30-odd police officers and others to assist the CBI-led SIT in its probe into the laddu-ghee adulteration case.
The Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams, which was directed to provide all necessary logistical support, has earmarked Bhudevi Complex near the Alipiri Link Bus Station in Tirupati for the CBI-led SIT to establish its local office and coordinate its probe from there.
The CBI-led SIT investigation into the laddu-ghee adulteration case will be under the direct supervision of the CBI Director as per the instructions of the apex court.
Meanwhile, a team of SIT, including DSPs Sita Ramanjaneyulu, Siva Narayana Swamy, Krishna Mohan, and Venkata Ramaiah, reached Tirupati on Friday and launched their investigation into the case.
According to sources, four teams have been formed to cover various aspects of the investigation, including inspection of the TTD marketing godowns, temple kitchen at Tirumala, and TTD health lab at Tirumala, where the quality of raw materials used in the preparation of laddus is tested. They will also visit AR Dairy Foods at Dindigul in Tamil Nadu, which is accused of supplying ghee adulterated with animal fats to the TTD.
The CBI team will also meet various TTD officials and staff during the course of their investigation to probe deeper into the ghee procurement and testing parameters adopted by the Tirupati trust. ghee laddu adulteration substitution animal fats investigation alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India laddu fflo:hasAdulterant ghee laddu-ghee adulteration case ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fats supplying ghee adulterated with animal fats ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fats ghee adulterated with animal fats animal fats fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee ghee adulterated with animal fats ghee fflo:hasAdulterant unspecified adulterant laddu-ghee adulteration case144:Tc73,CBI's SIT begins probe into Tirupati laddu 'ghee adulteration' case | Vijayawada News - Times of India indiatimes.com TIRUPATI: The special investigation team (SIT) led by the CBI has formally started its probe into the alleged adulteration of ghee meant for preparation of Tirupati laddu prasadam. CBI officials who will be part of the SIT are S Veeresh Prabhu (agency's joint director in Hyderabad) and Murali Rambha (CBI SP in Visakhapatnam).
Andhra Pradesh govt earlier appointed Guntur range IG Sarvashresth Tripathi and Gopinath Jatti (DIG, Visakhapatnam range) as SIT members from the state. The team launched its investigation by going through the laboratory reports on the alleged adulterated samples of the ghee. The team is likely to visit Tirumala for ground level probe soon.
The SIT was constituted on the orders of the Supreme Court. The apex court, in its order on Oct 4, constituted an independent five-member SIT, comprising two CBI officers, two senior police officers from Andhra Pradesh, and one official from the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI). 
The SC also brought the investigation directly under the supervision of the CBI director. 
The FSSAI is yet to nominate its member to the SIT.
The SIT is learnt to have examined July's lab reports from the Centre of Analysis and Learning in Livestock and Food (CALF), a multidisciplinary laboratory of the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB), which confirmed the presence of animal fat in the ghee supplied to TTD by Tamil Nadu-based AR Dairy Foods. The firm was subsequently blacklisted by the Tirupati trust, which also initiated criminal proceedings against it.
The alleged adulteration of Tirupati laddu came as a shock to millions of devotees of Lord Venkateswara around the world. Chief minister N Chandrababu Naidu said a lab report of NDDB confirmed the presence of animal fat in the ghee supplied by the private dairy, and accused the previous trust board and the YSRCP govt of maladministration in Tirumala temple's affairs. A petition was subsequently filed in the Supreme Court, which ordered a five-member SIT to probe into the alleged adulteration of ghee. ghee adulteration animal fat SIT probe blacklisting criminal proceedings alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India Tirupati laddu fkg:hasIngredient ghee ghee meant for preparation of Tirupati laddu prasadam ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat confirmed the presence of animal fat in the ghee presence of animal fat in ghee prov:wasAttributedTo AR Dairy Foods confirmed the presence of animal fat in the ghee supplied to TTD by Tamil Nadu-based AR Dairy Foods ghee adulteration finding fflo:identifies animal fat confirmed the presence of animal fat in the ghee ghee adulteration finding fflo:foundIn ghee presence of animal fat in the ghee ghee adulteration finding fflo:confirmedBy NDDB lab report lab report of NDDB confirmed the presence of animal fat criminal proceedings against AR Dairy Foods fflo:issuedBy Tirupati trust blacklisted by the Tirupati trust, which also initiated criminal proceedings against it SIT probe order fflo:issuedBy Supreme Court Supreme Court, which ordered a five-member SIT to probe145:Tee6,Gautam Budh Nagar: 370 kg sweets, 750 ltr oil seized in food safety checks hindustantimes.com Gautam Budh Nagar: 370 kg sweets, 750 ltr oil seized in food safety checks
Multiple teams of the Gautam Budh Nagar Food Safety and Drug Administration are conducting raids and collecting samples to ensure good quality of sweets
NOIDA: Ahead of Diwali festival on Thursday, the Food Safety and Drug Administration officials of Gautam Budh Nagar district have seized at least 370 kg of sweets and 750 litres oil that was found “unfit” for consumption during inspections carried out in parts of Noida and Greater Noida in the last two days alone, officials said on Monday.
Multiple teams of the Gautam Budh Nagar Food Safety and Drug Administration (FSDA) are conducting raids and collecting samples to ensure good quality of sweets, dairy products, and other edible items are available in the market during the festive season.
“Our goal is to ensure that residents have access to pure and safe food during the festive season. Through rigorous inspections and sampling, we aim to uphold food quality standards. Any violations found will lead to strict action to protect public health,” said Sarvesh Mishra, assistant commissioner food (II), Gautam Budh Nagar.
“A total of 14 samples that have been collected over the two days have been sent to laboratories for analysis. Further action will be taken based on the test results. The FSDA assures that similar inspections will continue in the days leading up to Diwali,” the officer added.
The inspection drives have been ramped up following directions of Manish Kumar Verma, the district magistrate, to ensure safe and unadulterated food for residents during the days-long festive season.
In one such raid at Kasna, Greater Noida, a sample of kalakand (sweet) was collected from a facility, and a sample of cottage cheese was obtained from another dairy. The team also seized around 125 kg of contaminated rasgullas from another production facility in Bilaspur and disposed of them.
To be sure, the FSDA takes actions under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006, which can include legal proceedings, fines up to ₹5 lakh for minor offenses, and higher in severe cases. Adulterated items are seized, and the responsible party’s business license may be suspended or cancelled.
In serious cases, particularly where public health is at high risk, imprisonment may be enforced. FSDA also issues public notifications for consumer safety and conducts regular inspections to ensure food quality standards are upheld.
- Senior Correspondent, Hindustan Times. Reports on district administration, health, civic issues, and environmental concerns in Noida and Greater Noida. Graduated from MJP Rohilkhand University in 2015 and started career in journalism in 2016, at The Times of India, UP West (Bareilly, Rampur, Moradabad and Sambhal) where reported on a range of issues including crime and politics till November 2021. Working with Hindustan Times since June, 2023.Read More edible oil substandard unsafe_food seizure suspected Noida, Gautam Budh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, India seizure of 370 kg sweets and 750 litres oil fflo:issuedBy Gautam Budh Nagar Food Safety and Drug Administration Food Safety and Drug Administration officials of Gautam Budh Nagar district have seized at least 370 kg of sweets and 750 litres oil seizure of 370 kg sweets and 750 litres oil fflo:inRegion Gautam Budh Nagar inspections carried out in parts of Noida and Greater Noida sample of kalakand fflo:collectedAt Production sample of kalakand (sweet) was collected from a facility seizure of contaminated rasgullas fflo:foundAtStep Production seized around 125 kg of contaminated rasgullas from another production facility rasgullas fflo:hasAdulterant contaminant contaminated rasgullas146:T1570,Fake Ghee: : Amul issues warning against fake ghee sales ahead of Diwali: Tip to identify real Amul ghee | - Times of India indiatimes.com With Diwali just around the corner, demand for ghee skyrockets as families gear up to prepare traditional sweets such as Laddoo, Halwa, various kinds of snacks and dishes. But in an unfortunate twist, this has also seen the alarming growth of adulterated ghee in the marketplace, especially for popular brands like Amul. This is why Amul has recently issued a public advisory warning consumers against the sale of counterfeit Amul ghee, especially in one-litre refill packs that the company has not produced for the last three years.
Fake ghee sold under Amul's nameThe dairy major said that some unscrupulous sellers are going ahead by circulating fake ghee in the market under the name of Amul to sell diluted products. It said this fake product is being sold mainly in one-litre refill packs, a format Amul stopped manufacturing three years ago. This will mislead consumers into buying such ghee that fails to meet the quality parameters and can also be hazardous to one's health.
Duplication-proof packagingWith increasing spurious products, Amul has brought duplication-proof carton packs that aid consumers in knowing the real ghee from the fake. New packaging is done at the ISO-certified dairies of Amul with the latest aseptic filling technology to give the best quality standards. Consumers need to check the packaging while buying the ghee whether it is an original one of Amul or not.
 
How to check the original Amul gheeTo further the cause of customers in identifying actual products, Amul asks consumers to be cautious of the shopping process during the festival season. "If any customer has suspicion or doubt about the genuine nature of ghee received, they can call Amul's toll-free number 1800 258 3333 for verification," explained the statement.
Recent controversy over Tirupati LadduAnother controversy Amul was involved with was TTD laddus. Several social media posts were there claiming that Amul ghee was being used in the making of the sacred laddus without a word of truth behind it. Amul responded fast by stating it has never supplied ghee to TTD, which separates itself from the allegations.
The controversy erupted when Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister Chandrababu Naidu blamed the previous state government for adding low-quality ingredients, even animal fat, in making laddus. Union Health Minister JP Nadda and Food Minister Prahlad Joshi had called for an inquiry. But Chief Minister YS Jagan Mohan Reddy has dismissed it as a political move.
Consumer alert during festival seasonBefore Diwali sets in, a reminder to consumers to be careful and not to buy fake ghee. With the duplication-proof packaging of Amul and a customer support helpline, they can raise another wall of defence between consumers not wanting fake products.
As counterfeit products still flood the market, Amul is taking all necessary steps to regain consumer confidence and ensure the safety and quality of its products.
Check the purity of gheeTo check the purity of ghee, you can perform a simple test. Take a small amount of ghee and place it in a bowl of cold water. Pure ghee will remain solid and will not dissolve, while adulterated ghee may leave oily residues or dissolve. Additionally, you can check for aroma; pure ghee has a rich, nutty fragrance, whereas impure ghee might have an off or bland smell. For a more detailed test, heating a spoonful of ghee should result in a clear liquid without any residue or smoke, indicating its purity.
Benefits of gheeGhee is said to be rich in vitamins such as A, D, E, and K, which are important for overall health and immune function. Also, ghee is proven to aid digestion by stimulating the secretion of gastric acids and promoting a healthy gut environment. And, during the clarification process, most of the lactose is removed, making ghee suitable for those who are lactose intolerant.
(Image courtesy: Twitter/@Amul_Coop) ghee counterfeit adulteration alleged India circulating fake ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith unscrupulous sellers unscrupulous sellers are going ahead by circulating fake ghee ghee fkg:hasIngredient Vitamin A Ghee is said to be rich in vitamins such as A ghee fkg:hasIngredient Vitamin D Ghee is said to be rich in vitamins such as A, D, E, and K ghee fkg:hasIngredient Vitamin E Ghee is said to be rich in vitamins such as A, D, E, and K ghee fkg:hasIngredient Vitamin K Ghee is said to be rich in vitamins such as A, D, E, and K fake ghee fflo:hasAdulterant diluted products sell diluted products fake ghee sold under Amul's name fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling sold under Amul's name fake ghee fflo:foundAt Retail circulating fake ghee in the market Amul fflo:issuedBy public advisory Amul has recently issued a public advisory fake ghee fflo:foundAt Retail fake ghee in the market cold water test fflo:producesIndicator solid ghee in cold water Pure ghee will remain solid and will not dissolve cold water test fflo:producesIndicator oily residues or dissolution adulterated ghee may leave oily residues or dissolve aroma test fflo:producesIndicator rich nutty fragrance pure ghee has a rich, nutty fragrance aroma test fflo:producesIndicator off or bland smell impure ghee might have an off or bland smell heating test fflo:producesIndicator clear liquid without residue or smoke heating a spoonful of ghee should result in a clear liquid without any residue or smoke147:T200a,Why food adulterators in India have all five fingers in ghee indiatoday.in Why food adulterators in India have all five fingers in ghee
Every festive season, adulterated food products, including ghee, flood India. Dairy giant Amul has issued a public warning about counterfeit ghee circulating in the market. This is why food adulterers love ghee.
In November 2023, Delhi Police busted a factory in Dwarka that manufactured 'spurious ghee' and sold it in containers with labels of brands such as Patanjali, Mother Dairy and Amul.Â Exactly a year ago, in 2022, Gujarat Police raided a fake ghee factory in Rajkot for selling a spurious concoction of pure ghee, palm oil and vegetable fat labelled as pure cow ghee on e-commerce platforms.
For most parts of India, pre-winter is the time of festivals, which means sweets! And those sweets need lots of ghee, for that perfect aroma and taste.
As the festive season (October-November) draws near, markets come alive with sweets and snacks, where the ones made of desi ghee are sought after. But behind the scenes, there's a darker story that is stirring. A flood of adulterated food products hits the shelves, and the worst-hit are milk and its derivatives -- butter, khoa, paneer, and ghee.
Months after the Tirupai prasadam row blew up in Andhra Pradesh and put ghee adulteration in the spotlight, an India Today SIT investigation uncovered an adulteration racket in Hathras, where adulterers were offered 'ghee' Rs 240 per kilogram, while real ghee goes for Rs 600 to Rs 800. It was an unhealthy mix of hydrogenated vegetable oil, refined oil, and artificial fragrance.
So, why do food adulterers have such a keen interest in ghee? Maybe it's the tag, 'liquid gold'.Â
AMUL REACTS AFTER INDIA TODAY'S INVESTIGATION UNCOVERS FAKE GHEE RACKET
The India Today Special Investigation Team (SIT), posing as Delhi shopkeepers looking for bulk ghee ahead of the festive rush, took a trip to Hathras, a major ghee-manufacturing hub in Uttar Pradesh. What they found was more scam than celebration. They were offered a concoction of hydrogenated vegetable oil, refined oil, and artificial fragrance, that would make the concoction resemble ghee.
According to the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), ghee is a pure-clarified fat derived solely from milk, curd, desi (cooking) butter, or cream, to which no colouring matter or preservative has been added.
The so-called "desi ghee", which typically sells for Rs 600 to Rs 800 per kilogram, was being offered at just Rs 240 per kilogram to the India Today SIT by adulterators in Hathras.
After the expose of the fake ghee being offered for sale in duplicate Amul cartons, the dairy major issued an advisory alerting consumers of fake ghee circulating in the market. The one-litre refill pack, which Amul discontinued three years ago, was being sold by some dishonest distributors, according to Amul Managing Director Jayen Mehta.
The high-profile case of alleged ghee adulteration in the laddu prasadams at Tirumala Tirupati Shrine, claimed to involve animal fat, shook India last month. The investigation into the Tirumala ghee was pausedÂ by the Supreme Court. However, it put the spotlight on the industry of fake and adulterated ghee.
So, why do food adulterers have such a keen interest in ghee?Â
THE LURE OF HIGH PROFITS DRIVES FAKE GHEE
The answer lies in the lucrative profits that can be made by cutting corners with cheap substitutes. Ghee is a staple in many Indian households, particularly during festive seasons when its demand surges.
The price of ghee in the market varies significantly, ranging from Rs 300 to Rs 1,000 per kg, depending on its purity. These days, some A2 ghee even sells for up to Rs 3,000 a kg.
Adulterers capitalise on this by mixing ghee with less expensive oils and fats, thereby maximising their margins. By adding refined vegetable oil, palm oil, or other cheaper alternatives, adulterers reduce their production costs.
The economic incentive, which is normally substantial, multiplies due to economics of scale. During the festival shopping spree, people often overlook whether the gheeÂ has FSSAI certification.
Adulteration not only increases their profit margins but also allows them to flood the market with cheaper, albeit substandard, products.
As of 2023, the ghee industry in India is worth Rs 3.2 lakh crore, and is predicted to shoot up to Rs 6.9 lakh crore by 2032, according to a study by market research firm IMARC Group.
The emergence of customised ghee segments, such as A2 ghee, aided by rising health consciousness and the rapidly expanding e-commerce sector, has pumped the numbers of the ghee industry, says theÂ India's Ghee Market Report 2024 by IMARC Group.
The massive demand provides ample opportunity for fraudsters like the ones in Hathras to exploit consumers, in turn, making huge profits in the process.
Consumers, often unaware of the adulteration, purchase these fake or adulterated ghee due to their lower prices. The consequences of which are severe that these adulterers overlook, putting public lives in danger. Consumers, too, at times, overlook the consequences.
It is the profit margin that has got the food adulterators to dip all five fingers in ghee, especially during the festive period.Â Â ghee adulteration raided uncovered alleged suspected India, Rajkot India, Hathras India, Tirumala Tirupati Shrine ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil spurious concoction of pure ghee, palm oil and vegetable fat ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable fat spurious concoction of pure ghee, palm oil and vegetable fat ghee adulteration racket in Hathras fflo:inRegion Hathras uncovered an adulteration racket in Hathras Tirupai prasadam row fflo:inRegion Andhra Pradesh Tirupai prasadam row blew up in Andhra Pradesh ghee standard lkif:created_by Food Safety and Standards Authority of India According to the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), ghee is a pure-clarified fat ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat alleged ghee adulteration in the laddu prasadams at Tirumala Tirupati Shrine, claimed to involve animal fat alleged ghee adulteration in laddu prasadams fflo:inRegion Tirumala Tirupati Shrine high-profile case of alleged ghee adulteration in the laddu prasadams at Tirumala Tirupati Shrine ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod mixing with cheaper oils and fats mixing ghee with less expensive oils and fats ghee fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy milk and its derivatives -- butter, khoa, paneer, and ghee butter fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy milk and its derivatives -- butter, khoa, paneer, and ghee khoa fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy milk and its derivatives -- butter, khoa, paneer, and ghee paneer fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy milk and its derivatives -- butter, khoa, paneer, and ghee milk fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy milk and its derivatives -- butter, khoa, paneer, and ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant hydrogenated vegetable oil unhealthy mix of hydrogenated vegetable oil, refined oil, and artificial fragrance ghee fflo:hasAdulterant refined oil unhealthy mix of hydrogenated vegetable oil, refined oil, and artificial fragrance ghee fflo:hasAdulterant artificial fragrance unhealthy mix of hydrogenated vegetable oil, refined oil, and artificial fragrance ghee fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy ghee is a pure-clarified fat derived solely from milk ghee adulteration fflo:hasFraudType Substitution concoction of hydrogenated vegetable oil, refined oil, and artificial fragrance, that would make the concoction resemble ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod substitution with cheap substitutes cutting corners with cheap substitutes substitution with cheap substitutes fflo:hasFraudType Substitution cutting corners with cheap substitutes fake ghee fflo:commonIn Hathras adulterators in Hathras ghee fflo:hasAdulterant refined vegetable oil mixing ghee with less expensive oils and fats ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil By adding refined vegetable oil, palm oil, or other cheaper alternatives mixing with cheaper oils and fats fflo:hasFraudType Dilution mixing ghee with less expensive oils and fats mixing with cheaper oils and fats fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional Adulterers capitalise on this by mixing ghee148:T645,Avoid Adulterated Ghee: 6 Easy Steps To Make Pure Quality Ghee At Home freepressjournal.in Avoid Adulterated Ghee: 6 Easy Steps To Make Pure Quality Ghee At Home
By: Amisha Shirgave | October 25, 2024
Gievn the current reports of fake ghee being busted at trusted stores, you should not compromise on the quality of the ghee you're intaking. Instead of buying, you can simple make your own ghee at home. Here are the steps
All images by Canva
Use unsalted butter. Take about 500 grams for a decent amount of ghee
Place the butter in a heavy-bottomed pan and heat it on low to medium flame. Let it melt completely, stirring occasionally
Once melted, let the butter simmer. After a while, you’ll see a foamy layer forming on top. Let it continue cooking until the foam reduces and the liquid turns a golden color
As the butter continues to simmer, you’ll notice milk solids sinking to the bottom and turning golden brown. This shows the water has evaporated, and the ghee is almost ready
Once you see clear, golden liquid and brown solids, turn off the heat. Let it cool slightly, then strain the ghee using a fine sieve or cheesecloth into a clean, dry jar
Let the ghee cool to room temperature before sealing the jar. You can store it at room temperature or in the fridge for longer shelf life ghee adulteration reports of fake ghee being busted at trusted stores recall_triggered India, trusted stores ghee fkg:hasIngredient unsalted butter Use unsalted butter. Take about 500 grams for a decent amount of ghee fake ghee fflo:foundAt trusted stores reports of fake ghee being busted at trusted stores149:Tc8d,FDA seizes food samples worth  ₹10.35 lakhs hindustantimes.com FDA seizes food samples worth ₹10.35 lakhs
The special campaign took place in the Pune region, which encompasses Pune, Solapur, Satara, Sangli, and Kolhapur districts
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) seized suspected substandard food items worth ₹10.35 lakh during its special drive conducted during the Navratri festival, the officials said on Friday.
The special campaign took place in the Pune region, which encompasses Pune, Solapur, Satara, Sangli, and Kolhapur districts. According to officials, improvement notices have been served to up to 38 food business operators (FBOs).
Stock worth ₹10.35 lakh was confiscated, including ₹7 lakh in the Pune district and ₹3.35 across the division. The drive aimed to ensure that the public gets hygienic and safe food during the festive season, keeping public health and welfare in mind, officials said.
Suresh Annapure, joint commissioner (FDA), Pune region, said, the action has been taken as per provisions of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006, and the Regulation, 2016.
“In Pune district, inspections were carried out at 10 establishments. From these establishments, 19 samples of food products such as milk, cream, paneer, khoya, ghee, butter, and namkeen were collected. The samples have been sent to a laboratory for analysis and further action will be taken based on the lab reports,” he said.
Annapure, added, “Food items that were seized are suspected to be adulteration. During the campaign, items like adulterated ghee, butter, khoya, and buckwheat were confiscated, amounting to a total of ₹7,00,460 from Pune district.”
Similarly, 28 establishments were inspected as part of the drive in the Pune division. As many as 15 food samples have been sent to a lab for analysis. Adulterated food products worth ₹3,34,918 were seized from the Pune region. A stock worth ₹10,35,378 was confiscated from Pune district and division, they said.
Citizens can report if they come across adulteration by calling the toll-free number 1800222356. ghee adulteration seizure improvement_notice suspected Pune, Maharashtra, India seizure of adulterated food products fflo:inRegion Pune region Adulterated food products worth ₹3,34,918 were seized from the Pune region Navratri special drive fflo:issuedBy Food and Drug Administration (FDA) The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) seized suspected substandard food items Pune region fflo:hasSubcategory Solapur district Pune region, which encompasses Pune, Solapur, Satara, Sangli, and Kolhapur districts Pune region fflo:hasSubcategory Satara district Pune region, which encompasses Pune, Solapur, Satara, Sangli, and Kolhapur districts Pune region fflo:hasSubcategory Sangli district Pune region, which encompasses Pune, Solapur, Satara, Sangli, and Kolhapur districts Pune region fflo:hasSubcategory Kolhapur district Pune region, which encompasses Pune, Solapur, Satara, Sangli, and Kolhapur districts milk fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy samples of food products such as milk, cream, paneer, khoya, ghee, butter cream fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy samples of food products such as milk, cream, paneer, khoya, ghee, butter14a:T719,Massive Seizure of 3,100kg Adulterated Ghee in Barmer Amid Festive Season | Jaipur News - Times of India indiatimes.com Jaisalmer: As the festive season begins, health department intensified efforts to combat food adulteration in Barmer. On Wednesday, the central food safety team seized 3,100 kg of adulterated ghee in a joint operation. Samples were sent to Jodhpur for testing.
The team targeted three establishments in Barmer city and one in Chauhatan, focusing on suspected brands like Indana, Gomul, and Seafom. Paneer samples were also collected.
The operation, part of the state's âPure Diet Adulteration-Free Family' campaign, was led by food safety commissioner Iqbal Khan, joint commissioner Dr. S.N. Dholpuria, and CMHO Dr. Mittal.
Around 200 kg of Seafom ghee from the agricultural produce market in Barmer and 2,800 kg of Indana ghee from Kailash Sales Corporation in the RIICO Industrial area were seized. Moreover, a sample of paneer was collected from Messrs. Vakal Agency. In Chauhtan, a sample of Gomul ghee was obtained from Messrs. Hanumant Kiran, and expired ghee from Vyas Ji and Gomul was destroyed, with the remaining ghee being seized by the authorities. ghee adulteration seizure pending_test India, Barmer Seizure of adulterated ghee in Barmer fflo:foundAtStep Retail seized 3,100 kg of adulterated ghee paneer sample fflo:collectedAt Retail Paneer samples were also collected Indana ghee fflo:hasAdulterant unspecified adulterant seized 3,100 kg of adulterated ghee Seizure of 3,100kg adulterated ghee fflo:foundAtStep Distribution 200 kg of Seafom ghee from the agricultural produce market ghee fflo:foundAtStep Retail sample of Gomul ghee was obtained from Messrs. Hanumant Kiran paneer sample collection fflo:foundAtStep Retail sample of paneer was collected from Messrs. Vakal Agency14b:Ta83,Tirupati laddoo row: Names of two cops sent to SC to probe ghee adulteration newindianexpress.com VIJAYAWADA: Director General of Police (DGP) Ch Dwaraka Tirumala Rao said the names of Guntur Range Inspector General of Police (IG) Sarvashresth Tripathi and Visakhapatnam Range Deputy Inspector General (DIG) Gopinath Jatti were forwarded to the Supreme Court. This is for constituting the Special Investigation Team (SIT) to probe the alleged use of adulterated ghee in preparation of Laddu Prasadam in Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD).
Speaking to media persons at the Secretariat on Tuesday, the DGP emphasised that the apex court had only substituted the SIT with an independent body and did not find any fault with the SIT formed by the State government to probe into the allegations that a Tamil Nadu-based company, AR Dairy Food Private Limited, supplied adulterated ghee to the TTD.
Torture case probe officer changed
“The names of Tripathi and DIG Gopinath Jatti were referred to the Supreme Court to investigate the issue, along with two officers from the CBI and one from FSSAI,” he explained. It may be recalled that the Supreme Court has ordered the constitution of an SIT with five officers, including two from the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), two from AP police and one senior official from the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) to probe into the alleged adulteration of Tirumala Laddu Prasadam.
LOC against Sajjala
Responding to the incident where YSRC leader and former government advisor Sajjala Ramakrishna Reddy was allegedly detained at the Delhi airport, the DGP said a Look Out Circular (LOC) was issued by Guntur SP against him in connection with an old case.
On Monday, Sajjala was allegedly stopped by immigration officials at the New Delhi Airport while returning from an overseas trip. He was scheduled to take a flight to Hyderabad. The YSRC leader is one of the accused in the case pertaining to the attack on TDP headquarters in Mangalagiri. His role is also suspected in the alleged harassment of Bollywood actress Kadambari Jethwani.
Rao also clarified that the investigation officer in the case pertaining to the alleged torture of Undi MLA K Raghurama Krishnam Raju was changed to expedite the probe. Guntur range police are monitoring the case proceedings regularly, he added. ghee Laddu Prasadam adulteration adulterated ghee constitution of an SIT alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India Laddu Prasadam fflo:hasAdulterant adulterated ghee alleged use of adulterated ghee in preparation of Laddu Prasadam constitution of an SIT fflo:issuedBy Supreme Court Supreme Court has ordered the constitution of an SIT14c:Ta30,Health Crisis in Nabha: Urgent Advisory After Fatal Dropsy Cases indiatimes.com Patiala: After the death of three members of a family in 
Nabha from dropsy in Sept likely due to the consumption of adulterated edible oil, the health department has issued an advisory to officials, including senior medial officers (SMOs), on timely reporting of notifiable diseases.
“No new instances of symptoms related to dropsy have been found in the district. The affected family had sourced mustard seeds from three places, and investigations are ongoing to trace their origin. It remains unclear whether the adulteration occurred at the seed level or during oil extraction process, and appropriate action will be taken once the probe concludes,” said Patiala epidemiologist Dr Sumit. Samples from the oil mill have been collected and sent for analysis.
Sumit said directions have been issued by the civil surgeon to all private hospitals to immediately report any indications of symptoms related to dropsy.
Patiala civil surgeon had notified the DC and the deputy registrar of co-operative societies that samples of mustard seeds and oil were being gathered from various sites across the district. The family had extracted the oil from raw seeds given to them by a person. Two women, aged 26 and 36, died in private hospitals, while a 72-year-old man died at home. A 7-year-old girl was also hospitalised. The situation came to light when another family member, a 50-year-old woman, was admitted to PGI, Chandigarh, in late Sept. On Oct 8, PGI notified Patiala health department about a suspected food-borne outbreak, after examining symptoms and family history. Food safety officers investigated the family’s house in Nabha and found they had pressed mustard oil in Aug from a local oil mill using their own mustard seeds. Oil tested positive for argemone. mustard oil adulteration argemone advisory suspected Nabha, Patiala, Punjab, India analysis fso:isPerformedOn Samples from the oil mill Samples from the oil mill have been collected and sent for analysis advisory fflo:issuedBy health department the health department has issued an advisory to officials mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant argemone Oil tested positive for argemone. mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant argemone Oil tested positive for argemone mustard oil fkg:hasIngredient mustard seeds extracted the oil from raw seeds samples of mustard seeds and oil fflo:collectedAt various sites across the district samples of mustard seeds and oil were being gathered from various sites argemone fflo:detectedBy LaboratoryTest Oil tested positive for argemone.14d:Tdda,Adulterated mustard oil behind 3 dropsy deaths in Nabha: report hindustantimes.com Adulterated mustard oil behind 3 dropsy deaths in Nabha: report
Three members of the family died in September, with two women aged 26 and 32, succumbing at private hospitals, while a 72-year-old man died at his residence. A 7-year-old girl is undergoing treatment in Patiala.
The Kharar-based state food lab report has confirmed that mustard oil adulterated with the poisonous argemone mexicana seeds led to the deaths of three members of a family due to dropsy in Nabha last month.
“The lab report has confirmed the Nabha family used mustard oil adulterated with argemone mexicana seed. We have already surveyed the area where the family fell ill, and no other individual was found suffering from dropsy,” said Patiala civil surgeon Dr Jatinder Kansal.
Three members of the family died in September, with two women aged 26 and 32, succumbing at private hospitals, while a 72-year-old man died at his residence. A 7-year-old girl is undergoing treatment in Patiala.
The matter came to light when a 52-year-old woman, who is a family member of the three deceased, was admitted to PGIMER-Chandigarh. The doctors at PGI, while taking the medical history of the admitted woman, diagnosed the symptoms as that of dropsy. The PGI doctors alerted the Patiala health department, which collected the samples and sent them for testing.
Dropsy is a clinical state resulting from the use of edible oils adulterated with Argemone mexicana seed oil. The most common symptoms include bilateral pitting edema, erythema, localised tenderness, and cardiac and respiratory issues.
Meanwhile, Dr Divjot Singh of Patiala health department said that a religious devotee had reportedly donated the mustard seeds to the family in August.
After a few days, the family got the oil extracted and as soon as the family started consuming adulterated mustard oil, the members started falling sick, he added.
“Two women of the family died at private hospitals in Patiala while the third member, who was a 72-year-old male, died at their home,” Dr Divjot said.
- Karam Prakash is a Patiala-based senior correspondent covering several districts of Malwa region of Punjab. He writes on various domains, including health, agriculture, power and education. mustard oil adulteration contamination argemone mexicana seeds survey lab_confirmed Nabha, Patiala, Punjab, India mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant argemone mexicana seeds mustard oil adulterated with the poisonous argemone mexicana seeds confirmation of argemone mexicana in mustard oil fflo:identifies argemone mexicana seeds lab report has confirmed the Nabha family used mustard oil adulterated with argemone mexicana seed confirmation of argemone mexicana in mustard oil fflo:foundIn mustard oil lab report has confirmed the Nabha family used mustard oil adulterated with argemone mexicana seed confirmation of argemone mexicana in mustard oil fflo:inRegion Nabha The lab report has confirmed the Nabha family used mustard oil adulterated with argemone mexicana seed. Argemone mexicana seed oil fflo:causesEffect Dropsy Dropsy is a clinical state resulting from the use of edible oils adulterated with Argemone mexicana seed oil. argemone mexicana seeds fflo:causesEffect dropsy mustard oil adulterated with the poisonous argemone mexicana seeds led to the deaths Dropsy fflo:hasEffectType fflo:AcuteEffect The most common symptoms include bilateral pitting edema, erythema, localised tenderness, and cardiac and respiratory issues.14e:T4a8,Food items worth Rs 4.5 cr seized in raids indianexpress.com Food items worth Rs 4.5 crore, suspected to be unhealthy, have been seized in raids across Gujarat under the Food Safety Fortnight campaign, the state government said on Sunday in an official release.
The special drive began on October 3, and will be held till October 17.
So far, a total of 5,486 samples have been collected, and 2,423 inspections have been carried out across the state under the drive, the release said, quoting Health Minister Rushikesh Patel.
Samples of allegedly adulterated 45.5 tonnes of ghee — caught from Mehsana and Patan — have been sent for testing, the statement added. After test results, legal action will be taken as per rules, it underlined. ghee adulteration seizure legal action alleged Mehsana, Patan, Gujarat, India allegedly adulterated ghee finding fflo:inRegion Patan Samples of allegedly adulterated 45.5 tonnes of ghee — caught from Mehsana and Patan ghee fflo:foundAtStep Mehsana Samples of allegedly adulterated 45.5 tonnes of ghee — caught from Mehsana Food Safety Fortnight campaign fflo:inRegion Gujarat seized in raids across Gujarat under the Food Safety Fortnight campaign14f:T1187,Markets Flooded With ‘Spurious Ghee’ | FSOs Collect Samples Of Over 30 Ghee Brands, Waiting For Reports freepressjournal.in Indore (Madhya Pradesh): While samples of a ghee brand, which was ready to be sold in a huge quantity across the city, failed to clear the quality test, there are over 30 sample reports of such suspicious ghee due with the state food testing laboratory. Not only ghee but the food safety officers are waiting for the reports of more than 300 food samples of various categories including legal and surveillance.
“Amid festivities, the supply of such spurious ghee significantly increases. During the investigation, it was found that such ghee is being supplied to the city majorly from Gujarat and Rajasthan,” senior food safety officer Manish Swami said. He added that under the supervision of Collector and ADM, the team of FSOs is spending days for more than a fortnight collecting over 300 samples to ensure safe and healthy food for the denizens.
Explaining the reasons of the surge in supply of spurious ghee, the senior food safety officer explained, “Indore is the city of celebration and various mass feasts (bhandaras) are being organised between Navratri and Diwali. It was found that such spurious ghee is being utilised during such feasts in the name of pure ghee.” The officials also blamed the caterers for using such ghee for preparing food for big events.
“Out of 10 sample reports received in last 10 days, 3-4 samples failed the quality test resulting in the seizure of the ghee as well as destroying it as per the protocol,” Swami added.
Samples of Gujarat and Rajasthan ghee brands taken
As per the food safety officials, they have collected the samples of various ghee brands manufactured in Gujarat and Rajasthan. Samples of some of the brands like Pure Ever, Vastu, Vidhi, Shrimati, Shriman, Ratnashri, and other were collected and officals are waiting for the reports. +box (Pleas highlight)
’Pure Ghee’ supplied for Rs 300-330 per kg
According to official sources, many brands are supplying spurious ghee in the name of pure ghee for Rs 300-330 per kilogram. “Price of real pure ghee is about Rs 600 per kilogram but these companies are flooding the market with spurious ghee and supplying it to the dealer for Rs 300-330 per kilogram. Many are giving fake bills of Rs 350-390 per kilogram but even supplying it for Rs 290 as well,” sources said. Free Press accessed some of the bills of such rates at which the ghee was supplied in the city.
Major action against ghee 1
Over 850 kg ghee of Mahashree brand seized by food safety officials, samples failed quality test 2 5,520 kg of substandard ghee, estimated to be worth about Rs 7 lakh, was seized. The ghee was prepared by mixing synthetic essence of ghee with palm oil, soybean oil and other edible oils. 3 Over 1,015 kg of counterfeit ghee, supplied in the name of Sanchi, was seized in Malharganj. Sample reports are pending and Sanchi will also lodge an FIR against the accused. ghee adulteration seizure pending_test Indore (, Madhya Pradesh, India, Indore (Madhya Pradesh) ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil mixing synthetic essence of ghee with palm oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant soybean oil mixing synthetic essence of ghee with palm oil, soybean oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant synthetic essence of ghee mixing synthetic essence of ghee with palm oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant Sanchi brand counterfeit ghee counterfeit ghee, supplied in the name of Sanchi ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil The ghee was prepared by mixing synthetic essence of ghee with palm oil spurious ghee fflo:foundAt Retail ready to be sold in a huge quantity across the city spurious ghee fflo:commonIn Gujarat ghee is being supplied to the city majorly from Gujarat spurious ghee fflo:commonIn Indore such spurious ghee significantly increases spurious ghee fflo:hasFraudType Substitution utilised during such feasts in the name of pure ghee spurious ghee fflo:foundAt Retail flooding the market with spurious ghee spurious ghee fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling supplying spurious ghee in the name of pure ghee Mahashree fflo:hasAdulterationMethod mixing synthetic essence of ghee with palm oil, soybean oil and other edible oils ghee was prepared by mixing synthetic essence of ghee with palm oil mixing synthetic essence of ghee with palm oil, soybean oil and other edible oils fflo:hasFraudType Substitution mixing synthetic essence of ghee with palm oil, soybean oil and other edible oils150:Tc8e,Crackdown Against Adulteration In Indore: FSOs Seize 850 Kg Of Spurious Ghee; Samples Fail Quality Test freepressjournal.in Indore (Madhya Pradesh): In a significant action against adulterated food products, food safety officers seized 850 kilograms of ghee found to be adulterated after samples failed quality tests. The raid on the distributor uncovered large quantities of substandard ghee being sold as genuine, raising serious concerns about public health.
According to food safety officers, they raided Shri Kuber Enterprises in Sanchar Nagar, where ghee manufactured by Rajasthan-based Bal Gopal Dairy Products was being distributed without a proper licence. The officers confiscated 850 kg of Mahashree brand ghee, valued at Rs 5.40 lakh.
Five samples were collected from different batches for testing. So far, two samples have failed the tests, confirming that the ghee was mixed with other oils. The results of the remaining three samples are still awaited. As part of an ongoing anti-adulteration campaign, the food safety officers also inspected several food establishments across the city.
“On Friday, samples of mawa and paneer were taken from Maa Rajeshwari Dudh Dahi Bhandar in Mahalaxmi Nagar, and paneer and ghee samples were collected from Jai Maa Ambe Dairy in Tulsi Nagar. Additionally, a sample of Namkeen Sev was seized from Shri Namkeen and Sweets in Sukhdev Nagar Extension for testing,” senior food safety officer Manish Swami said.
Private lab under scanner
A troubling aspect of the case is the involvement of a private lab, which initially cleared the adulterated ghee as safe. The report from this lab came eight days after testing, only for another lab to contradict the findings within three hours, revealing adulteration. The government lab later confirmed the presence of adulterants, raising concerns about potential corruption in private testing facilities.
Majorly consumed in ‘bhandara’
According to officials, such spurious ghee has been consumed majorly in rural areas as well as in the ‘bhandara’ being organised across the city during the festivities. Thousands of kilograms of ghee is being consumed during the festival season. ghee adulteration seizure pending_test India, Indore spurious ghee fflo:commonIn rural areas such spurious ghee has been consumed majorly in rural areas Mahashree Ghee fflo:hasAdulterant other oils confirming that the ghee was mixed with other oils Ghee adulteration finding fflo:foundAtStep Distribution The raid on the distributor uncovered large quantities of substandard ghee Ghee Adulteration Finding fflo:identifies other oils two samples have failed the tests, confirming that the ghee was mixed with other oils Ghee Adulteration Finding fflo:foundIn ghee two samples have failed the tests, confirming that the ghee was mixed with other oils Ghee Adulteration Finding fflo:inRegion Indore Crackdown Against Adulteration In Indore ghee fflo:hasAdulterant adulterants government lab later confirmed the presence of adulterants adulteration finding fflo:confirmedBy government lab analysis result government lab later confirmed the presence of adulterants adulteration finding fflo:identifies adulterants revealing adulteration151:T803,‘3 Dropsy deaths’: Patiala health officials launch probe hindustantimes.com ‘3 Dropsy deaths’: Patiala health officials launch probe
The probe was launched after a 52-year-old woman, a relative of the deceased, was admitted to PGIMER, Chandigarh. The medical history review of the patient suggested that she was suffering from dropsy.
Health officials in Patiala launched a probe after three members of a family, including two women, died in Nabha town due to ‘epidemic dropsy’.
Epidemic dropsy is a clinical state resulting from the use of edible oils adulterated with Argemone mexicana seed oil. The most common symptoms of epidemic dropsy include bilateral pitting edema, erythema, localised tenderness, and cardiac and respiratory issues. Two of the three deaths took place at private hospitals, while the 70-year-old man succumbed at his residence on September 30.
The probe was launched after a 52-year-old woman, a relative of the deceased, was admitted to PGIMER, Chandigarh. The medical history review of the patient suggested that she was suffering from dropsy. Patiala civil surgeon Dr Jatinder Kansal confirmed that health teams had been dispatched, and samples of the mustard oil consumed by the family had been sent to a laboratory for tests. “Efforts are underway to identify the source of the mustard seeds,” said Dr Sumeet Singh of the Patiala health department, adding, “Once the supplier is identified, we will investigate if adulterated mustard oil has been distributed elsewhere.” mustard oil adulteration contamination Argemone mexicana seed oil probe suspected Nabha, Patiala, Punjab, India Argemone mexicana seed oil fflo:causesEffect epidemic dropsy Epidemic dropsy is a clinical state resulting from the use of edible oils adulterated with Argemone mexicana seed oil. mustard oil fflo:belongsToCategory Oils samples of the mustard oil consumed by the family mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant Argemone mexicana seed oil samples of the mustard oil consumed by the family had been sent to a laboratory for tests152:Tba2,Tirupati laddoo row: Joint team raids ghee manufacturer in Uttarakhand newindianexpress.com DEHRADUN: In a surprise operation, a joint team of food safety officials from Andhra Pradesh and Uttarakhand swooped down on a ghee manufacturing company in Bhagwanpur, Roorkee, on Sunday.
Sources have revealed that the ghee manufacturing company raided in Roorkee, Uttarakhand, has supplied approximately 70,000 kg of ghee to the revered Tirupati Balaji Temple for preparing sacred 'laddus' (prasad) offered to devotees.
The temple's prasad is revered by millions, making the allegations particularly sensitive. Authorities have sealed the company premises, restricting entry until further notice.
Investigations have revealed that the ghee used in the sacred 'laddu' prasad distributed at Tirupati Balaji Temple was sourced from a company in Uttarakhand.
"The probe has found that the ghee used in the temple's prasad laddus was being manufactured by a company based in Chauli Shahabuddinpur, Bhagwanpur, Uttarakhand," a police source said.
A controversy has erupted surrounding the sacred laddu prasad offered at the Tirupati Balaji Temple in Andhra Pradesh, with allegations of adulteration in the ghee used in its preparation.
Reports suggest that animal fat, including beef tallow and fish oil, was found in the ghee. This shocking revelation has sparked widespread outrage among devotees and prompted a high-level investigation.
The Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) has blacklisted the supplier and switched to the Karnataka Milk Federation for future ghee procurement. The Supreme Court has also taken cognizance of the matter.
A Special Investigation Team (SIT) has been formed to probe the allegations, and laboratory tests have confirmed the presence of foreign fats in the ghee.
"The investigation is ongoing," stated Yogendra Pandey, Senior Food Safety Officer. "We have collected samples of ghee, milk, and other materials from the company. A thorough examination of documents will reveal further details." Notably, approximately 70,000 kilograms of ghee had already been supplied to the temple. ghee adulteration beef tallow fish oil foreign fats raid sealed premises blacklisted supplier alleged Roorkee, Haridwar, Uttarakhand, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant beef tallow allegations of adulteration in the ghee used in its preparation. Reports suggest that animal fat, including beef tallow ghee fflo:hasAdulterant fish oil animal fat, including beef tallow and fish oil, was found in the ghee foreign fats fflo:detectedBy laboratory tests laboratory tests have confirmed the presence of foreign fats ghee fflo:hasAdulterant foreign fats presence of foreign fats in the ghee beef tallow fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee allegations of adulteration in the ghee used in its preparation. Reports suggest that animal fat, including beef tallow ghee manufacturing company prov:wasAssociatedWith adulteration of ghee allegations of adulteration in the ghee used in its preparation153:Te45,Omfed under lens for substandard ghee supply newindianexpress.com JAGATSINGHPUR: Priests of Maa Sarala temple on Friday alleged that state milk cooperative Omfed has supplied substandard ghee to the shrine for preparation of prasad.
In response, the food safety officer issued a notice to Omfed for supplying tins of ghee to the shrine sans proper label and symbol.
Sources said ‘manda pitha’, offered to Goddess Sarala during Dussehra, holds a special place among devotees. Hundreds of people throng the temple to partake the delicacy, which is known not only for its taste but also for its supposed ability to cure various ailments with the blessings of the Goddess.
Around 500 to 700 manda pithas are offered to the deity during the festival while approximately 250 are distributed among the sevayats free of cost. The sevayats then sell the cakes to devotees at prices ranging from Rs 100 to Rs 200.
The temple administration had bought around 20 tins of ghee from Omfed three to four days back. However, while preparing the cakes, the sevayats noticed a foul smell emanating from the kitchen and alleged the ghee was adulterated. They promptly replaced the contaminated ghee with fresh supplies. The sevayats then reported the issue to the temple administration, which in turn sought the intervention of the district administration on the issue.
Chief priest of Maa Sarala temple, Ranjan Panda said, “We noticed a foul smell emanating from the cakes while preparing them on Thursday. The temple administration buys ghee from Omfed’s local factory in Nuapada within Tirtol police limits. After receiving the complaint, we replaced the adulterated ghee and continued preparing the rice cakes with fresh supplies. We have requested the administration to conduct a probe into the matter.”
In-charge CEO of Sarala Temple Administration Pratap Kumar Jena said, “On noticing the foul smell emanating from the ghee, we immediately stopped using it. We have requested the food safety officer to investigate the matter.”
Food safety officer, Samita Das stated, “The department had conducted a raid and found that the ghee packets supplied to Maa Sarala temple lacked proper label and supplier information. A notice has been issued regarding the absence of the company’s label on the tins. Samples of ghee-one from a sealed packet and another from the adulterated batch-have been collected for testing. The samples will be sent to the Standard Testing Laboratory in Bhubaneswar for analysis.” ghee adulteration mislabeling notice to Omfed alleged Jagatsinghpur, Odisha, India notice to Omfed fflo:issuedBy food safety officer food safety officer issued a notice to Omfed notice to Omfed fflo:targets ghee notice to Omfed for supplying tins of ghee ghee adulteration at Maa Sarala temple prov:wasAssociatedWith Omfed Omfed has supplied substandard ghee to the shrine ghee fflo:hasAdulterant unknown adulterant alleged the ghee was adulterated ghee adulteration at Maa Sarala temple prov:used ghee supplied substandard ghee to the shrine ghee adulteration allegation at Maa Sarala temple fflo:foundAtStep Retail alleged that state milk cooperative Omfed has supplied substandard ghee to the shrine ghee adulteration at Maa Sarala temple fflo:foundAtStep Retail supplied substandard ghee to the shrine foul smell in ghee fflo:producedBy SensoryTest noticed a foul smell emanating from the cakes foul smell detection in ghee fflo:producedBy SensoryTest noticing the foul smell emanating from the ghee ghee analysis fso:isPerformedAt Standard Testing Laboratory in Bhubaneswar sent to the Standard Testing Laboratory in Bhubaneswar for analysis154:T1387,Ghee for Tirupati laddus not made at TN dairy, reveals document siasat.com Tirupati: Eight tankers of alleged adulterated ghee which arrived at Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam (TTD) in June and July this year for making laddu prasadam had not originated from the Tamil Nadu-based dairy, which was given the contract for supply, reveals a confidential document.
Records of the Commercial Taxes Department of Andhra Pradesh show that all eight trucks received from A.R. Dairy Food Private Limited, Dindigul, Tamil Nadu did not originate in their dairy.
Based on e-invoices, e-way bills and tanker transport documents, the department found that all eight vehicles originated from Vaishnavi Dairy Speciality Private Limited, Tirupati, and travelled to Dindigul and then round-tripped to TTD. This was a violation of tender conditions as trading of ghee was not allowed.
The e-invoices indicate that the same vehicles from Vaishnavi to AR Diary were diverted to TTD.
The documents show that even Vaishnavi Dairy did not make this ghee. It was further procured from Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Milk Private Limited in Uttarakhand. Bhole Baba and Vaishnavi allegedly share the same directors.
According to the document, Bhole Baba sold all eight trucks of ghee to Vaishnavi at Rs 412 and 403 per kg. Vaishnavi allegedly adulterated the ghee and supplied it to A.R. Dairy at Rs 318.57 per kg. A.R. Dairy supplied the same ghee to TTD at Rs 319 per kg.
On a request by the TTD, the Commercial Taxes Department verified the facts relating to the supply of ghee by A.R. Dairy following allegations that it contained animal fat.
After the tests of the samples collected from four tankers revealed the presence of animal fat, the TTD sent back the tankers and issued a show-cause notice to AR Dairy for blacklisting the company.
The Commercial Taxes Department informed TTD that out of eight transactions with five vehicles referred, all the vehicles originated from Vaishnavi Dairy Speciality Pvt Ltd, Penubaka village, Penamalur Mandal, Tirupati district. Four vehicles with five trips having Tamil Nadu registration numbers moved to Dindigul for delivery to A.R. Dairy Foods Pvt Ltd, Dindigul and from Dindigul to Tirupati.
The remaining vehicle effected the delivery of ghee 3 times directly to TTD without any movement from Penubaka to Dindigul and Dindigul to Tirupati.
The verification of inward supply of Vaishnavi Dairy shows that it procured 19,500 kgs of ghee at Rs 412 per kg, 29,000 kgs at Rs 403 and 1,58,500 kgs at Rs 313.60 during June 2024 from Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Milk Pvt. It procured 64,000 kgs at Rs 403 per kg and 19,500 kgs at Rs 412 in July 2024 from the same company.
Analysis of documents related to the outward supply of ghee by Vaishnavi Dairy made to A.R. Dairy shows a supply of 16,700 kgs at Rs 315 per kg, 34,265 kgs at Rs 316.60 per kg during June 2024 and 16,730 kgs at Rs 334.39 and 69,500 kgs at Rs 316.60 during July 2024. The weighted average comes to Rs 318.57. ghee adulteration animal fat show-cause notice blacklisting alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India show-cause notice to AR Dairy fflo:citesFinding presence of animal fat in ghee After the tests of the samples collected from four tankers revealed the presence of animal fat, the TTD sent back the tankers and issued a show-cause notice to AR Dairy ghee supply fraud prov:wasAssociatedWith Vaishnavi Dairy Speciality Private Limited all eight vehicles originated from Vaishnavi Dairy Speciality Private Limited ghee transport to TTD fflo:occursAt Distribution Eight tankers of alleged adulterated ghee which arrived at Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam round-tripping fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional This was a violation of tender conditions Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Milk Private Limited prov:wasAssociatedWith Vaishnavi Dairy Speciality Private Limited Bhole Baba and Vaishnavi allegedly share the same directors ghee adulteration by Vaishnavi prov:wasAssociatedWith Vaishnavi Dairy Speciality Private Limited Vaishnavi allegedly adulterated the ghee ghee adulteration at Vaishnavi prov:used ghee Vaishnavi allegedly adulterated the ghee animal fat prov:wasGeneratedBy ghee adulteration at Vaishnavi Vaishnavi allegedly adulterated the ghee animal fat fflo:foundAt Distribution tests of the samples collected from four tankers revealed the presence of animal fat animal fat detection in ghee fflo:identifies animal fat tests of the samples collected from four tankers revealed the presence of animal fat animal fat fflo:foundIn ghee tests of the samples collected from four tankers revealed the presence of animal fat animal fat detection in ghee fflo:foundAtStep Distribution samples collected from four tankers animal fat detection in ghee fflo:triggeredAction blacklisting of AR Dairy issued a show-cause notice to AR Dairy for blacklisting Vaishnavi Dairy Speciality Private Limited prov:wasAssociatedWith A.R. Dairy Food Private Limited outward supply of ghee by Vaishnavi Dairy made to A.R. Dairy155:T10db,Ghee supplied for Tirupati laddus not made at TN dairy, reveals document thehansindia.com Tirupati : Eight tankers of alleged adulterated ghee which arrived at Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam (TTD) in June and July this year for making laddu prasadam had not originated from the Tamil Nadu-based dairy, which was given the contract for supply, reveals a confidential document.
Records of the Commercial Taxes Department of Andhra Pradesh show that all eight trucks received from A.R. Dairy Food Private Limited, Dindigul, Tamil Nadu did not originate in their dairy.
Based on e-invoices, e-way bills and tanker transport documents, the department found that all eight vehicles originated from Vaishnavi Dairy Speciality Private Limited, Tirupati, and travelled to Dindigul and then round-tripped to TTD. This was a violation of tender conditions as trading of ghee was not allowed.  
The e-invoices indicate that the same vehicles from Vaishnavi to AR Diary were diverted to TTD.
The documents show that even Vaishnavi Dairy did not make this ghee. It was further procured from Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Milk Private Limited in Uttarakhand. Bhole Baba and Vaishnavi allegedly share the same directors.  
According to the document, Bhole Baba sold all eight trucks of ghee to Vaishnavi at Rs 412 and 403 per kg. Vaishnavi allegedly adulterated the ghee and supplied it to A.R. Dairy at Rs 318.57 per kg. A.R. Dairy supplied the same ghee to TTD at Rs 319 per kg.
On a request by the TTD, the Commercial Taxes Department verified the facts relating to the supply of ghee by A.R. Dairy following allegations that it contained animal fat.
After the tests of the samples collected from four tankers revealed the presence of animal fat, the TTD sent back the tankers and issued a show-cause notice to AR Dairy for blacklisting the company.
The Commercial Taxes Department informed TTD that out of eight transactions with five vehicles referred, all the vehicles originated from Vaishnavi Dairy Speciality Pvt Ltd, Penubaka village, Penamalur Mandal, Tirupati district. Four vehicles with five trips having Tamil Nadu registration numbers moved to Dindigul for delivery to A.R. Dairy Foods Pvt Ltd, Dindigul and from Dindigul to Tirupati.  
The remaining one vehicle effected the delivery of ghee 3 times directly to TTD without any movement from Penubaka to Dindigul and Dindigul to Tirupati.
The verification of inward supply of Vaishnavi Dairy shows that it procured 19,500 kgs of ghee at Rs 412 per kg, 29,000 kgs at Rs 403 and 1,58,500 kgs at Rs 313.60 during June 2024 from Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Milk Pvt. It procured 64,000 kgs at Rs 403 per kg and 19,500 kgs at Rs 412 in July 2024 from the same company.
Analysis of documents related to the outward supply of ghee by Vaishnavi Dairy made to A.R. Dairy shows a supply of 16,700 kgs at Rs 315 per kg, 34,265 kgs at Rs 316.60 per kg during June 2024 and 16,730 kgs at Rs 334.39 and 69,500 kgs at Rs 316.60 during July 2024. The weighted average comes to Rs 318.57. ghee adulteration tests of the samples collected from four tankers revealed the presence of animal fat pending_test India, Tirupati ghee supply fraud prov:wasAssociatedWith Vaishnavi Dairy Speciality Private Limited all eight vehicles originated from Vaishnavi Dairy Speciality Private Limited ghee supply fraud fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling trading of ghee was not allowed ghee transport to TTD fflo:occursAt Distribution Eight tankers of alleged adulterated ghee which arrived at Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam ghee fflo:inputTo making laddu prasadam for making laddu prasadam Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Milk Private Limited fflo:commonIn Uttarakhand Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Milk Private Limited in Uttarakhand ghee adulteration at Vaishnavi prov:wasAssociatedWith Vaishnavi Dairy Speciality Private Limited Vaishnavi allegedly adulterated the ghee ghee adulteration at Vaishnavi prov:used ghee Vaishnavi allegedly adulterated the ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat tests of the samples collected from four tankers revealed the presence of animal fat ghee adulteration at Vaishnavi prov:wasAssociatedWith Vaishnavi Vaishnavi allegedly adulterated the ghee animal fat detection in ghee fflo:identifies animal fat tests of the samples collected from four tankers revealed the presence of animal fat156:T10e9,Ghee supplied for Tirupati laddus not made at TN dairy, reveals document theshillongtimes.com Tirupati, Oct 5: Eight tankers of alleged adulterated ghee which arrived at Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam (TTD) in June and July this year for making laddu prasadam had not originated from the Tamil Nadu-based dairy, which was given the contract for supply, reveals a confidential document.
Records of the Commercial Taxes Department of Andhra Pradesh show that all eight trucks received from A.R. Dairy Food Private Limited, Dindigul, Tamil Nadu did not originate in their dairy. Based on e-invoices, e-way bills and tanker transport documents, the department found that all eight vehicles originated from Vaishnavi Dairy Speciality Private Limited, Tirupati, and travelled to Dindigul and then round-tripped to TTD.
This was a violation of tender conditions as trading of ghee was not allowed. The e-invoices indicate that the same vehicles from Vaishnavi to AR Diary were diverted to TTD. The documents show that even Vaishnavi Dairy did not make this ghee. It was further procured from Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Milk Private Limited in Uttarakhand.
Bhole Baba and Vaishnavi allegedly share the same directors. According to the document, Bhole Baba sold all eight trucks of ghee to Vaishnavi at Rs 412 and 403 per kg. Vaishnavi allegedly adulterated the ghee and supplied it to A.R. Dairy at Rs 318.57 per kg. A.R. Dairy supplied the same ghee to TTD at Rs 319 per kg.
On a request by the TTD, the Commercial Taxes Department verified the facts relating to the supply of ghee by A.R. Dairy following allegations that it contained animal fat. After the tests of the samples collected from four tankers revealed the presence of animal fat, the TTD sent back the tankers and issued a show-cause notice to AR Dairy for blacklisting the company.
The Commercial Taxes Department informed TTD that out of eight transactions with five vehicles referred, all the vehicles originated from Vaishnavi Dairy Speciality Pvt Ltd, Penubaka village, Penamalur Mandal, Tirupati district. Four vehicles with five trips having Tamil Nadu registration numbers moved to Dindigul for delivery to A.R. Dairy Foods Pvt Ltd, Dindigul and from Dindigul to Tirupati.
The remaining one vehicle effected the delivery of ghee 3 times directly to TTD without any movement from Penubaka to Dindigul and Dindigul to Tirupati. The verification of inward supply of Vaishnavi Dairy shows that it procured 19,500 kgs of ghee at Rs 412 per kg, 29,000 kgs at Rs 403 and 1,58,500 kgs at Rs 313.60 during June 2024 from Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Milk Pvt.
It procured 64,000 kgs at Rs 403 per kg and 19,500 kgs at Rs 412 in July 2024 from the same company. Analysis of documents related to the outward supply of ghee by Vaishnavi Dairy made to A.R. Dairy shows a supply of 16,700 kgs at Rs 315 per kg, 34,265 kgs at Rs 316.60 per kg during June 2024 and 16,730 kgs at Rs 334.39 and 69,500 kgs at Rs 316.60 during July 2024. The weighted average comes to Rs 318.57.
IANS ghee adulteration animal fat show-cause notice blacklisting alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India animal fat in ghee prov:wasAttributedTo A.R. Dairy supply of ghee by A.R. Dairy following allegations that it contained animal fat ghee adulteration at Tirupati prov:wasAssociatedWith Vaishnavi Dairy Speciality Private Limited Vaishnavi allegedly adulterated the ghee ghee adulteration at Tirupati prov:wasAssociatedWith A.R. Dairy Food Private Limited A.R. Dairy supplied the same ghee to TTD ghee adulteration at Tirupati fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional Vaishnavi allegedly adulterated the ghee ghee adulteration at Tirupati fflo:foundAt Tirupati Eight tankers of alleged adulterated ghee which arrived at Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat allegations that it contained animal fat ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat tests of the samples collected from four tankers revealed the presence of animal fat IncidentFinding: animal fat in ghee fflo:triggeredAction show-cause notice to AR Dairy for blacklisting TTD sent back the tankers and issued a show-cause notice to AR Dairy for blacklisting the company Vaishnavi Dairy Speciality Pvt Ltd fflo:procuredFrom Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Milk Pvt procured 19,500 kgs of ghee ... from Bhole Baba Organic Dairy Milk Pvt157:T1405,Tirupati Laddu Row: SC Orders New SIT Probe Into Ghee Adulteration deccanchronicle.com CBI Director to Supervise Investigations
Vijayawada: The Supreme Court has ordered an inquiry into the allegation that adulterated ghee was used for laddu prasadam preparations at the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams. A five-member, independent Special Investigation Team (SIT) would undertake the probe under the supervision of the CBI director.
A division bench of Justices BR Gavai and KV Viswanathan heard a batch of five writ petitions in New Delhi on Friday.
The court observed, “To assuage the feelings of crores of people/devotees, we find that an investigation should be conducted by an independent SIT consisting of two representatives each from CBI and Andhra Pradesh government and a representative from Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI).”
The court stated, “We find that it will be appropriate that the investigation is carried out under the supervision of the director of CBI.”
“We, however, clarify that the instant order passed by this court should not be construed as any reflection on the independent mind or the fairness of the officers of the SIT constituted by AP government. We are passing the order regarding entrustment of this matter to an independent agency only to assuage the feeling of crores of people/devotees having faith in the deity,” it said.
The court said, “At the outset, we clarify that we have not gone into the allegations and counter allegations made in either of the petitions or the stand of the respondents. We would not permit the court to be used as a political battleground.”
The court observed that the petitions filed by the petitioners sought reliefs including the formation of a committee of a retired judge of the SC or a retired chief justice of the high court for a deeper probe into the allegations.
It noted that an FIR was registered by the AP state police, saying that the ghee received in two tankers on 06-07-2024 and in two more tankers on 12-07-2024 from the same supplier was found to be adulterated. It was alleged in the FIR that the adulterated ghee was used in the preparation of laddu prasadam.
Such an allegation, the apex court noted, had the potential to hurt the sentiments of crores of the temple’s devotees worldwide.
The court said that on Sept 30, Solicitor General Tushar Mehta was asked to state whether the investigation could be continued by the SIT of AP or by another investigating agency. He responded that all the members of the state SIT were having a good reputation.
The solicitor general also stated that there would be no issue if the investigation is done by the SIT of AP. He proposed that the court direct an officer of the central government, senior to the members of SIT of AP, to supervise the investigation.
In the course of hearing, Justice Gavai asked TTD’s counsel Siddarth Luthra on the statement of AP chief minister Chandrababu Naidu, as reported in the media, that he had no objection to any investigation ordered by the apex court.
MP and former TTD chairman YV Subba Reddy’s counsel Kapil Sibal pressed for an independent investigation. The SIT of AP could not be expected to carry out an independent investigation as the chief minister already took a stand that the ghee was adulterated.
AP government counsel Mukul Rohatgi submitted that the lab report from the National Dairy Development Board came in July. It was on that basis the CM made the statement with regard to “adulteration of ghee used for laddu preparation of TTD with animal fat.”
Kapil Sibal asked how the CM knew about ghee’s adulteration with lard (animal fat). Rohatgi replied that the lab report said so. Sibal countered it by saying that the lab report referred to vegetable fats.
Justice Viswanathan told Luthra that two consignments of ghee received on July 6 and 12 were not used, as was stated by TTD chairman. To this, Luthra said the ghee consignments that reached the hill on both the days were contaminated.
Sibal asked as to why such contaminated ghee was allowed to reach the hill shrine. Luthra said the contract was given to the supplier in December last by the YSRC dispensation at TTD.
Justice Gavai concluded that an independent SIT may investigate the matter in place of the present state SIT. Following this, the court dictated the order and disposed of the petitions of Subramanian Swamy, former TTD chairman YV Subba Reddy, Suresh Chavhanke and Vikram Sampath. ghee adulteration investigation pending_test India, Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams laddu prasadam fkg:hasIngredient ghee ghee was used for laddu prasadam preparations SIT probe supervision fflo:issuedBy CBI supervision of the CBI director SIT formation order fflo:issuedBy Supreme Court Supreme Court has ordered an inquiry ghee fflo:hasAdulterant adulterated ghee ghee received in two tankers... was found to be adulterated FIR registration fflo:issuedBy AP state police FIR was registered by the AP state police ghee fflo:hasAdulterant contaminated substance ghee consignments that reached the hill on both the days were contaminated158:Tcb2,Supreme Court orders SIT probe into alleged use of adulterated ghee in Tirupati laddus scroll.in The Supreme Court on Friday ordered a Special Investigation Team to probe allegations by the Andhra Pradesh government that the previous administration had used ghee adulterated with animal fat to prepare laddus at the Sri Venkateswara temple in Tirupati, Bar and Bench reported.
A bench of Justices BR Gavai and KV Viswanathan directed that the investigating team will have two officers from the Central Bureau of Investigation, two from the Andhra Pradesh Police and one senior official from the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India.
The probe will be carried out under the supervision of the director of the Central Bureau of Investigation, the court said.
An independent probe was required to “assuage feelings of crores of people”, said the bench, adding that the decision should not be construed as questioning the credibility of the members of the Special Investigation Team that the state had constituted.
The bench also said that it was not making an observation about the merits of the allegations and counter-allegations in the matter, Live Law reported.
The court was hearing a batch of petitions seeking an investigation into the allegations that the ghee used to prepare laddus at the temple in Tirupati contained animal fat.
While hearing the pleas on Monday, the Supreme Court rebuked Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu for publicly alleging that adulterated ghee had been used.
Naidu had claimed on September 18 that substandard ingredients and animal fat were used to make the prasadam while the YSR Congress Party was in power in the state. The YS Jagan Mohan Reddy-led YSR Congress Party lost power in the Assembly elections that concluded in early June.
The court questioned the propriety of Naidu’s claims, which were made despite the matter being under investigation by the temple authorities.
The bench verbally observed that according to the lab reports it had seen, the ghee samples tested for contamination came from rejected batches that were not used to make laddus.
“There are some disclaimers in the lab report,” Viswanathan had said. “It is not clear and it is prima facie indicating that it was rejected ghee, which was subjected to test. If you [Andhra Pradesh government] yourself have ordered the investigation, what was the need to go to press.”
“The Hon’ble Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh had gone in public making a statement that the animal fat was being used to make Tirupati laddus under the previous regime,” the court had observed. “This report prima facie indicates that this is not the material which was used in the preparation of the laddus.”
The court had said that it was expected of high constitutional authorities such as chief ministers to make statements that can “affect the sentiments of crores of people”. ghee adulteration animal fat SIT probe ordered alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat ghee adulterated with animal fat alleged adulteration of ghee in laddus prov:wasAssociatedWith Sri Venkateswara temple used ghee adulterated with animal fat to prepare laddus at the Sri Venkateswara temple159:Tac5,SC constitutes new five-member SIT to investigate adulterated ghee claims under CBI chief indiatimes.com New Delhi: The 
Supreme Court on Friday ordered the constitution of an independent five-member special investigation team (
SIT) to probe allegations that 
adulterated ghee containing animal fat was used for preparing laddus served as prasadam at the Sri Venkateswara Swamy Temple in 
Tirumala, Andhra Pradesh.
A division bench of justices BR Gavai and KV Viswanathan also made it clear that it will "not permit the (top) court to be used as a 
political battleground".
The bench said the SIT will comprise two officers from the 
Central Bureau of Investigation (
CBI), two officers from the 
Andhra Pradesh police and a senior officer from the 
Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI). The SIT will replace the one set up by the state government earlier, it said.
The investigation will be supervised by the CBI director, who will also nominate the two CBI officers to the SIT. The Andhra Pradesh government will nominate two state police officers to the SIT while the FSSAI chairperson will name one of its senior officers for the probe team. Dictating the order, Justice Gavai said "at the outset we clarify that we have not gone into allegations and counter allegations... we have constituted the committee only to assuage the feelings of crores of people having faith in the deity".
The bench clarified that its order "should not be construed as a reflection on the independence and fairness of the members of the state SIT".
Earlier, solicitor general (SG) Tushar Mehta, appearing on behalf of the Centre, had suggested that the state SIT may be supervised by an officer appointed by the central government. "I have examined the issue. One thing is clear (that) if there is any truth in the allegations then it is unacceptable. I have nothing against members of the present SIT. Let it (state SIT) be supervised by a senior official from the central government. That will inspire confidence," Mehta suggested. At the last hearing, the bench had sought Mehta's assistance on the issue.On the other hand, senior advocate Mukul Rohatgi, appearing on behalf of Andhra Pradesh government, contended that the state appointed SIT should be allowed to proceed with the probe.
"Any officer of the court's choice can be added. There can be no allegation against the SIT," he said. ghee adulteration animal fat SIT constitution alleged Tirumala, Andhra Pradesh, India adulterated ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat adulterated ghee containing animal fat laddus fkg:hasIngredient ghee adulterated ghee containing animal fat was used for preparing laddus RegulatoryAction_SIT_Constitution fflo:targets ghee probe allegations that adulterated ghee15a:T118d,Supreme Court Forms New SIT to Investigate Tirupati Laddu Ghee Adulteration Controversy | Vijayawada News - Times of India indiatimes.com VIJAYAWADA: The 
Supreme Court on Friday constituted an independent 
Special Investigation Team (SIT), replacing the one appointed by the 
Andhra Pradesh govt, to probe into the allegations of using adulterated ghee in the preparation of Laddu prasadam at Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam (TTD).
The new SIT will consist of two members from the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) nominated by its director, two members from the state nominated by the govt, and one member from the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (
FSSAI) nominated by its chairman.
The Supreme Court further stated that the SIT will be supervised by the director of the 
CBI.
Four petitions have been filed before the Supreme Court seeking a judicial probe by a retired judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice of a high court into the allegations of using adulterated ghee in Laddu preparation. 
Former chairman of TTD, Y V Subba Reddy, and Subrahmanuam Swamy were among the petitioners.
The Supreme Court had earlier taken a serious view of the issue and asked the Solicitor General, Tushar Mehta, to assist the bench in deciding whether to continue with the SIT probe or to order a probe with an independent body. 
Taking objection to the statements made by political leaders, including the chief minister N Chandrababu Naidu, the Supreme Court also remarked that at least God should be kept out of politics.
On Friday, when the matter was called, Tushar Mehta told the bench comprising Justice B R Gavai and Justice K V Viswanathan that he did not find anything against the members of the SIT and that they are competent enough to probe the matter. 
However, given the seriousness of the allegations, there may be a supervising officer above the rank of members of the SIT nominated by the union govt.
Arguing on behalf of Subba Reddy, senior counsel Kapil Sibal said that it is not fair to allow the state police to investigate the issue as they work under the control of the state govt, and it was the chief minister who made the statement. âHad he not made that statement, it would have been different,â said Sibal.
Arguing on behalf of the TTD, senior counsel Siddharth Luthra said that they have discovered that the ghee supplied by the contractor was not manufactured at his facility but procured from outside. 
He stated that the SIT is probing into all these aspects. Another senior counsel, Mukul Rohatgi, for the state govt, said that the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) report clearly suggests the usage of lard in the ghee and that the SIT will unravel all details.
Taking strong objection to the arguments of Rohatgi, Sibal said, âIf the ghee is contaminated, why did the TTD allow it to be used in the laddu in the first place?â As the arguments between the counsels heated up, Justice Gavai said, âLet there be an independent investigation with the members of the state, central, and experts from FSSAI.â 
As none of the counsels raised any objection to that proposal, the apex court constituted a new SIT, replacing the existing one formed by the state govt. 
The Supreme Court clarified that the new SIT is constituted only in view of the seriousness of the issue as it involves the sentiments of crores of devotees, but not on the merits of the present SIT investigation or its members. ghee adulteration substitution lard procured ghee formation of SIT alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India allegations of using adulterated ghee in Laddu preparation prov:wasAttributedTo Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam allegations of using adulterated ghee in the preparation of Laddu prasadam at Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam ghee fflo:hasAdulterant procured ghee ghee supplied by the contractor was not manufactured at his facility but procured from outside ghee fflo:hasAdulterant lard usage of lard in the ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant lard usage of lard in the ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant lard usage of lard in the ghee Tirupati Laddu fflo:hasAdulterant adulterated ghee allegations of using adulterated ghee in the preparation of Laddu prasadam ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod procurement from outside instead of manufacturing ghee supplied by the contractor was not manufactured at his facility but procured from outside usage of lard in ghee fflo:supportedBy NDDB report NDDB report clearly suggests the usage of lard in the ghee15b:Td81,Ghee adulteration row: Andhra Pradesh Endowments Minister Anam Ramanarayana Reddy welcomes constitution of SIT by Supreme Court thehindu.com Andhra Pradesh Endowments Minister Anam Ramanarayana Reddy has welcomed the five-member Special Investigation Team (SIT) constituted by the Supreme Court of India to investigate the alleged adulteration of ghee used in making the Tirumala laddu prasadams.
Speaking on his arrival in Tirupati on October 4 (Friday) for participating in the annual Srivari Brahmotsavams in Tirumala, Mr. Ramanarayana Reddy said the government strongly believed that the SIT would unearth facts pertaining to the alleged use of adulterated ghee. The issue had assumed significance as it involved the sentiments of crores of Hindus across the world.
With the new SIT, comprising two officials each from the State and the CBI and one expert from the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), he said the inclusion of a wider range of experts from relevant fields would enhance the scope of the probe and help get a larger perspective.
“The court has not found fault with the SIT formed by the State, but has only suggested measures to widen its scope. Similarly, the Supreme Court has never found fault with the State government, but only faulted the erstwhile TTD Trust Board Chairman Y.V. Subba Reddy,” the Minister observed.
Similarly, he wondered why Mr. Subba Reddy had gone to the Supreme Court seeking a halt to the vigilance inquiry on the alleged irregularities in the TTD during his tenure.
“If he (Mr. Subba Reddy) is clean, he should not have knocked on the door of the Supreme Court to halt the probe,” Mr. Ramanarayana Reddy noted, maintaining that the tender procedures had been altered during the erstwhile YSRCP government.
“We are moving ahead with the firm resolution to restore Tirumala’s sanctity and assuage the sentiments of the Hindus that have been deeply hurt by such violations,” the Minister said.
Later, speaking in Tirumala, he expressed confidence that the court-ordered SIT would bring the truth to light and address the concerns of millions of devotees. He also affirmed to share all the relevant information and evidences with the SIT.
In a blistering attack, he alleged the tenure of Mr. Subba Reddy was marked by several irregularities, including decline in the quality of ‘annaprasadam’ and laddu, and entering into dark agreements (by manipulating the tender norms) in the procurement of ghee and other engineering works.
Truth will prevail: Anitha
Andhra Pradesh Home Minister V. Anitha, while welcoming the constitution of SIT, told the media in Anakapalli that it was a good sign, and hoped that truth would prevail. She wondered why Mr. Subba Reddy was afraid of the vigilance inquiry into the issue. Ms. Anitha also dared the YSRCP leaders to come for a debate over the development initiatives in the 100 days of NDA government.
Published - October 04, 2024 08:10 pm IST ghee laddu prasadams adulteration ghee constitution of SIT alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India Tirumala laddu prasadams fflo:hasAdulterant ghee alleged adulteration of ghee used in making the Tirumala laddu prasadams alleged adulteration of ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith Y.V. Subba Reddy faulted the erstwhile TTD Trust Board Chairman Y.V. Subba Reddy manipulating tender norms prov:wasAssociatedWith Y.V. Subba Reddy entering into dark agreements (by manipulating the tender norms)15c:Tb45,TD Alleges Massive Irregularities in TTD Ghee Procurement deccanchronicle.com Tirupati: The Telugu Desam has levelled allegations against the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams, alleging irregularities in procurement of ghee used for the Tirumala Laddu preparations during the YSR Congress term.
Addressing a press conference at the TD office in Nellore on Wednesday, party spokesman Anam Venkataramana Reddy alleged discrepancies in the ghee procurement from 2019 to 2024. The use of a reverse tendering system during that time allowed purchase of substandard ghee at low prices, he said.
Anam said that while TTD paid Rs 496.90 per kg ghee in 2023, the price dropped to Rs 320 per kg in six months, when it was offered by Tamil Nadu-based AR Dairy Foods. From August 2019 to July 2020, TTD procured 22.58 lakh kg of ghee at Rs 389.90/kg, followed by 7 lakh kg at Rs 294.10/kg from August to December 2020.
This apart, 10 lakh kg ghee was procured at Rs 324.96/kg between Dec 2020 and May 2021. From June 2021 to March 2022, 25 lakh kg of ghee was purchased at `392.22/kg.
Anam asked how such a drastic reduction in prices could be feasible without compromising quality. He accused AR Dairy Foods of supplying adulterated ghee and claimed that the sharp drop in procurement costs was the result of a nexus formed during the YSRC term to extract commissions.
Reddy also alleged that the YSRC administration had forced TTD to relax key tender norms, such as reducing the operating history requirement for participating dairies from three years to one year, lowering the annual turnover requirement from Rs 250 crore to Rs 150 crore, and eliminating conditions regarding the capacity to procure and store large volumes of milk and ghee.
He argued that these changes were part of a deliberate attempt to benefit certain companies.
The TD spokesperson produced waybills that, he alleged, proved the transportation of ghee from Vyshnavi Dairy in Tirupati district to AR Dairy in Dindigul, Tamil Nadu. A ghee tanker travelled nearly 500km and returned with adulterated ghee to Tirumala the next day, which was then handed over to TTD in July 2024, he claimed.
Anam urged YSRC leaders, including former TTD chairpersons Y.V. Subba Reddy and Bhumana Karunakar Reddy, to seek forgiveness from Lord Balaji for their alleged involvement in the irregularities. ghee adulteration adulterated ghee alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt Tirumala returned with adulterated ghee to Tirumala allegation of adulterated ghee supply prov:wasAttributedTo AR Dairy Foods accused AR Dairy Foods of supplying adulterated ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant unspecified adulterant accused AR Dairy Foods of supplying adulterated ghee supplying adulterated ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith AR Dairy transportation of ghee from Vyshnavi Dairy in Tirupati district to AR Dairy in Dindigul15d:Tb38,Tirupati laddu ghee row: MD of TN dairy firm moves Andhra HC seeking anticipatory bail - News Today | First with the news newstodaynet.com The MD of a Tamil Nadu-based dairy firm, which supplied ghee to Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam (TTD) has moved the Andhra Pradesh High Court seeking anticipatory bail in connection with a case registered against the company in Tirupati last week.
According to the court’s website R Rajasekharan, Managing Director of AR Dairy Food Private Ltd filed the petition on September 30 and is likely to come up for hearing on October 3.
Rajasekharan sought a direction to the state government not to arrest him in connection with the case registered in East Tirupati police station, until disposal of the present Criminal Petition.
TTD, the custodian of the super-rich shrine of Lord Venkateswara at Tirumala hills here, on September 25 lodged a police complaint against AR Dairy Foods Pvt Ltd for allegedly supplying adulterated ghee for making Tirupati laddus.
A senior police official said that the case has now been transferred to the nine-member SIT, which is probing into the alleged ‘adulteration’ of Tirupati laddus with animal fats.
However, the probe by the SIT was suspended following the Supreme Court remarks.
Earlier at a press conference, TTD Executive Officer J Shyamala Rao had said that lab tests have revealed the alleged presence of animal fat and lard in chosen samples of ghee supplied by AR Dairy.
However, the firm dismissed the charges, saying its product samples have been duly cleared by authorities certifying its quality. ghee adulteration animal fat lard police complaint lodged case transferred to Special Investigation Team anticipatory bail sought alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat lab tests have revealed the alleged presence of animal fat and lard in chosen samples of ghee Lab finding of lard in ghee fflo:foundIn ghee lab tests have revealed the alleged presence of animal fat and lard in chosen samples of ghee animal fat fflo:detectedBy lab tests lab tests have revealed the alleged presence of animal fat lard fflo:detectedBy lab tests lab tests have revealed the alleged presence of animal fat and lard alleged adulteration of Tirupati laddus with animal fats prov:wasAssociatedWith AR Dairy Food Private Ltd probing into the alleged 'adulteration' of Tirupati laddus with animal fats alleged adulteration of Tirupati laddus with animal fats prov:wasAssociatedWith R Rajasekharan R Rajasekharan, Managing Director of AR Dairy Food Private Ltd ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fats allegedly supplying adulterated ghee Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration case prov:used ghee supplying adulterated ghee for making Tirupati laddus alleged adulteration of Tirupati laddus fflo:inRegion Tirupati probing into the alleged 'adulteration' of Tirupati laddus15e:T123c,Tirupati Laddu row: TDP raises doubts over ghee procurement at TTD at unviable rates during YSRCP term | Vijayawada News - Times of India indiatimes.com TIRUPATI: TDP state official spokesperson Anam Venkataramana Reddy expressed doubts about how the 
Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams could procure ghee at rock bottom and unviable rates following the "reverse rendering" system adopted during the erstwhile YSRCP regime.
Addressing a press conference at the TDP office at Nellore on Wednesday, Anam shared the details of ghee procurement carried out by the TTD between 2019 to 2024, to substantiate his claims.
He pointed out that between August of 2019 till July of 2020, TTD procured 22.58 lakh kgs of ghee at Rs 389.90 per kg. Between August to December of 2020, Tirupati trust procured 7 lakh kgs of ghee at Rs 294.10 per kg.
Between December of 2020 till May of 2021, TTD procured 10 lakh kgs of ghee at Rs 324.96, and between June of 2021 till March of 2022, Tirupati trust procured 25 lakh kgs of ghee at Rs 392.22. Between March to September of 2022, TTD procured another 25 lakh kgs of ghee at Rs.329.
Between October of 2022 till January of 2023, TTD procured 30 lakh kgs of ghee at Rs 467.86 and between February of 2023 till December of 2023, TTD procured 10 lakh kgs of ghee at Rs 496.90.
"Pointing out that while the Tirupati trust procured ghee by shelling out Rs 496.90 in 2023, within six months tender quotes from AR dairy foods private limited, Dindigul in 
Tamil Nadu to supply ghee at an unviable rate of Rs 320 per kg, as a nexus was already formed to procure substandard 
adulterated ghee at any rates for commissions", the TDP spokesperson alleged.
Anam also pointed out that several key tender clauses such as the dairy farm taking part in the TTD procurement tenders should have been operation for at least three years was relaxed to just one year, removal of conditions such as the dairy firm should have the capacity to procure and store 4 lakh litres of milk and should have the capacity to process 8 lakh kgs of ghee within an year, relaxation of the annual turnover of the dairy firms from Rs 250 crore to Rs 150 crore, were all part of the handiwork of the unholy nexus aimed for alleged commissions.
Anam Venkataramana Reddy also pointed out that AR dairy foods private limited, which refused to supply ghee to the TTD for Rs 408.04 per kg in November-December of 2023, agreed to supply ghee to TTD at Rs 320 in 2024, which happens to be the lowest ever rate at which the TTD procured ghee in the last 5 years.
The TDP spokesperson also produced two waybills, using which a ghee tanker from one Vyshnavi dairy in Tirupati district, went all the way to AR dairy foods at Dindigul, located about 500 kms away from Tirupati and immediately reached Tirumala the very next day with the adulterated ghee supplies and handed over the same to the TTD in the month of July this year.
The TDP spokesperson slammed the YSRCP for trying to mislead the devotees on the Laddu-ghee adulteration issue time and again and demanded the YSRCP leaders including former TTD chairmans YV Subba Reddy and Bhumana Karunakar Reddy, to visit the Tirumala temple and seek pardon of Lord Venkateswara Swamy for all the sins they committed at TTD in the last five years.
Reiterating that chief minister Nara Chandrababu Naidu brought to light the use of adulterated ghee in the preparation of the sacred Tirupati Laddu prasadams with a sole intention to inform the devotees about the misdeeds of the previous govt, as the devotees have every right to know about the same, Anam stated that the TDP led NDA govt will wait for the directions of the Supreme court in the issue and will subsequently initiate all necessary measures to streamline the administrative as well as the Dharmic affairs at Tirumala. ghee laddu adulteration adulterated ghee alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India adulterated ghee supplies at TTD fflo:foundAtStep Tirumala reached Tirumala the very next day with the adulterated ghee supplies Tirupati Laddu fflo:hasAdulterant adulterated ghee use of adulterated ghee in the preparation of the sacred Tirupati Laddu prasadams procurement of substandard adulterated ghee fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional nexus was already formed to procure substandard adulterated ghee adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt Distribution reached Tirumala the very next day with the adulterated ghee supplies adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt Retail handed over the same to the TTD in the month of July this year adulterated ghee finding prov:wasAttributedTo Nara Chandrababu Naidu chief minister Nara Chandrababu Naidu brought to light the use of adulterated ghee15f:Tad8,Inspection Conducted at Burger King Outlet in Malakpet, deccanchronicle.com Advertisement  
Hyderabad: The Commissioner of Food Safety conducted inspection at a Burger King outlet at Malakpet in Hyderabad and found issues related to cooking oil.
The palm oil used for frying non-vegetarian items were found with Total Polar Compound (TPC) value beyond the permissible limit. The TPC value found in the cooking oil was 27.0 which is beyond the permissible limit of 25.0.
According to the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), oil should not have more than 25% TPC and having more than 25% of TPC is not safe for human consumption.
For this reason, 15 litres of cooking oil was seized by the Commissioner of Food Safety.
FSSAI license copy, Medical fitness, Pest control records and Water analysis reports of the outlet were found valid.
( Source : Deccan Chronicle )
Next Story palm oil substandard contamination Total Polar Compound Seizure of 15 litres of cooking oil unclear Hyderabad, Malakpet, Telangana, India palm oil fflo:hasAdulterant Total Polar Compound palm oil used for frying non-vegetarian items were found with Total Polar Compound (TPC) value beyond the permissible limit TPC Limit 25.0 fflo:hasValue 25.0 permissible limit of 25.0 TPC value beyond permissible limit in cooking oil fflo:triggeredAction Seizure of 15 litres of cooking oil The palm oil used for frying non-vegetarian items were found with Total Polar Compound (TPC) value beyond the permissible limit. The TPC value found in the cooking oil was 27.0 which is beyond the permissible limit of 25.0. According to the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), oil should not have more than 25% TPC and having more than 25% of TPC is not safe for human consumption. For this reason, 15 litres of cooking oil was seized by the Commissioner of Food Safety. Seizure of 15 litres of cooking oil fflo:targets palm oil The palm oil used for frying non-vegetarian items were found with Total Polar Compound (TPC) value beyond the permissible limit. The TPC value found in the cooking oil was 27.0 which is beyond the permissible limit of 25.0. According to the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), oil should not have more than 25% TPC and having more than 25% of TPC is not safe for human consumption. For this reason, 15 litres of cooking oil was seized by the Commissioner of Food Safety. Total Polar Compound fflo:causesEffect unsafe for human consumption having more than 25% of TPC is not safe for human consumption TPC Limit 25.0 fflo:appliesTo Total Polar Compound permissible limit of 25.0 TPC Limit 25.0 fflo:inFood palm oil oil should not have more than 25% TPC TPC Limit 25.0 fflo:appliesTo Total Polar Compound oil should not have more than 25% TPC160:Tce3,SIT intensifies probe into ghee adulteration case thehansindia.com Tirupati: The Special Investigation Team (SIT), established by the AP government to probe allegations of adulterated ghee in the preparation of Tirumala Srivari laddus, ramped up its inquiry on Monday, marking the third consecutive day of investigation.
Led by Guntur Range Inspector General Sarvashresth Tripathi, the SIT split into multiple teams to conduct an exhaustive investigation at several Tirumala-Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) facilities. Key sites under scrutiny included TTD's flour mills, marketing office, laboratory, laddu production units, and sales counters. Team members DIG Gopinath Jetti, SP Harshavardhan Raju and Additional SP Venkata Rao reached Tirumala on Monday to probe various aspects there. Sources revealed that the investigation focused heavily on the TTD laboratory, where ghee samples from incoming tankers are regularly tested. Investigators focused on the testing procedures used to detect adulterants such as animal fat, reviewing both the equipment and testing protocols to ensure they were capable of identifying contamination. Lab officials were questioned about their testing methods, with investigators scrutinising if past results could have missed signs of adulteration.
At the laddu production units, the SIT reviewed the handling and storage of ingredients, particularly ghee. They inspected the entire production process and questioned staff involved in laddu preparation, focusing on whether there were any quality control lapses. Officials also inquired if employees had observed any irregularities in the ghee’s quality before the allegations came to light.  
Simultaneously, the SIT teams inspected the sales counters where laddus are distributed to devotees, checking for any prior complaints about the laddus' taste or quality. Investigators also reviewed storage conditions and questioned sales staff to determine if there were any noticeable changes in the aroma or consistency of the laddus.  
The investigation, which began with two days of information gathering, has since transitioned to on-site inspections. The SIT met with TTD Executive Officer J Syamala Rao on Sunday and requested access to departmental records. TTD Procurement GM Murali Krishna has also been summoned to provide details on the ghee procurement process and the vendors involved.  
Additionally, a separate SIT team has been dispatched to Dindigul, Tamil Nadu, to inspect AR Dairy Foods Private Limited, one of TTD’s ghee suppliers. Meanwhile, AR Dairy Foods’ Managing Director Rajasekharan has filed for anticipatory bail in the Andhra Pradesh High Court, seeking protection from arrest amid the ongoing investigation into the alleged supply of adulterated ghee. ghee adulteration animal fat investigation alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India Tirumala Srivari laddus fkg:hasIngredient ghee adulterated ghee in the preparation of Tirumala Srivari laddus ghee sample testing fso:isPerformedAt TTD laboratory ghee samples from incoming tankers are regularly tested animal fat fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee detect adulterants such as animal fat AR Dairy Foods Private Limited prov:wasAssociatedWith alleged supply of adulterated ghee investigation into the alleged supply of adulterated ghee161:Td05,SIT probe into the alleged adulterated ghee temporarily suspended: Andhra Pradesh DGP Dwaraka Tirumala Rao thehindu.com The investigation into the alleged use of adulterated ghee in the preparation of laddus at the temple of Lord Venkateswara has been temporarily suspended, according to Director General of Police (DGP) Ch. Dwaraka Tirumala Rao.
The Special Investigation Team (SIT), tasked with probing the matter, will await further instructions from the Supreme Court, which is set to hear the case on October 3.
Addressing the media on Tuesday (October 1, 2024), the DGP disclosed that the SIT, during its three-day investigation, had gathered preliminary information regarding the procurement and tendering process of the ingredients used in the temple offerings. The team also visited the laboratory at Tirumala to assess the situation.
The SIT was formed following a revelation by Chief Minister N. Chandrababu Naidu on September 18, that animal fat had been used in the preparation of the ghee by a supplier and it was used in the preparation of prasadams, including the laddu at the temple. The claim sent shockwaves across the State, raising concerns among devotees and temple authorities alike.
In a significant development, the Supreme Court, while hearing a batch of petitions on Monday, raised several pertinent questions regarding the authenticity of the allegations. The Apex Court inquired if there was any evidence to substantiate the claim that adulterated ghee was indeed used in the preparation of the laddus. Further, it sought clarification from Siddharth Luthra, the counsel representing the State government, as to whether the adulterated laddus were subjected to any form of testing.
The court also expressed its concern over the government’s handling of the issue, particularly questioning as to why a second opinion was not sought before making such a sensitive and far-reaching announcement, which has the potential to deeply hurt the sentiments of millions of devotees. The Bench also observed that religious matters, especially those related to sacred offerings, should be handled with utmost care, noting, “Let gods be kept away from politics.”
In light of these observations, the DGP announced that the SIT would temporarily halt its investigations until the Supreme Court’s next hearing. The SIT’s future course of action will depend on the directives issued by the Apex Court.
Published - October 01, 2024 04:38 pm IST ghee adulteration animal fat temporary suspension of investigation alleged Tirumala, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat animal fat had been used in the preparation of the ghee laddu fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat animal fat had been used in the preparation of the ghee by a supplier and it was used in the preparation of prasadams, including the laddu at the temple adulteration of ghee with animal fat prov:wasAssociatedWith supplier animal fat had been used in the preparation of the ghee by a supplier laddu fkg:hasIngredient ghee preparation of laddus at the temple of Lord Venkateswara prasadams fkg:hasIngredient ghee used in the preparation of prasadams, including the laddu Supreme Court fflo:triggeredAction temporary halt of SIT investigation SIT would temporarily halt its investigations until the Supreme Court's next hearing162:T3cfb,Tirupati laddu row | On the economics of, and adulterants in ghee: Explained thehindu.com The famous Tirupati laddus are at the centre of a controversy after Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N. Chandrababu Naidu claimed that ‘animal fat’ was in the ghee used to make the laddus during the previous regime headed by Y.S. Jaganmohan Reddy.
The Tirupati or Srivari laddus have been devotional offerings, prasadam, made to the deity of Sri Venkateswara at Tirumala in Tirupati district for over 300 years. They are made in special kitchens, ‘potus,’ using gram flour, sugar, cashews, cardamom, ghee and raisins. The making of the laddoos involves the use of approximately 10 tonnes of cow ghee on a daily basis. Around 3,00,000 laddoos are distributed at the temple every day.
Earlier this month, Mr. Naidu said a lab report had indicated that ghee used to make the laddoos was contaminated, possibly with animal fats such as beef tallow and lard.
The report was from a laboratory in Gujarat, the Centre of Analysis and Learning in Livestock and Food (CALF) at the Central government-run National Dairy Development Board. It was the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam (TTD), an independent trust that manages the Tirumala Venkateswara Temple, that had called for the report.
Meanwhile, the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), the government’s apex food regulatory authority that functions under the Union Health Ministry, has issued a show-cause notice to A.R. Dairy, one of the companies that supplied ghee to the Tirupati temple, for allegedly providing substandard products. The dairy has denied that its ghee was impure or substandard. The issue has snowballed and, the Supreme Court weighing in, said there is currently nothing to show that animal fat was used in the preparation of Tirupati laddus during the previous regime and said Mr. Naidu should have “kept the gods away from politics”.
What exactly was stated in the lab report, what are the FSSAI regulations around ghee testing and what are animal fat adulterants?
What is beef tallow?
Beef tallow is made by removing, simmering and clarifying fatty tissue that surrounds the organs of ruminant animals. Ruminant animals are those that chew their cud and include cows, buffaloes, sheep and goats. It is white-ish, solidifies when cooled and has a texture similar to that of butter.
Beef tallow is made up primarily of saturated fats, and is usually used for cooking at high temperatures such as deep frying and roasting. It also has other uses – it can be an ingredient in candles and soaps for instance.
As per the FSSAI beef fat or suet means fat obtained from a beef carcass. It should have a saponification value varying from 193 to 200 and an iodine value from 35 to 46. It may also contain permitted food additives
What is lard?
Lard is obtained by rendering or melting the fatty tissue of hogs or domesticated pigs. It is a creamy white solid or semisolid, also with a butter-like consistency.
Lard was once a highly valued cooking and baking fat. Nowadays though, while used for certain cooking and baking purposes, lard has mostly been replaced by various types of vegetable oils, many of which are lower in total and saturated fat content.
Lard, the FSSAI says, means the rendered fat from hogs and shall not contain more than one percent of substances other than fatty acids and fat. It should have a saponification value varying from 192 to 198 and iodine value from 52 to 65. It may also contain permitted food additives.
Also Read:Politicising the laddu: On the Tirupati laddu and its ‘adulteration’
How can animal fats appear in milk products?
There is a long history of the adulteration of ghee in India – both with vegetable and animal fats. This is done primarily due to economics – vegetable oils and tallow are much cheaper than milk fats, and ghee is a premium, expensive and much in demand commodity.
Common adulterants include edible vegetable oil, hydrogenated fats, animal body fats and starchy substances.
What is the FSSAI test for the presence of animal body fat in vegetable fat?
An FSSAI 2021 document says gas liquid chromatography can be used for this test. “The methyl esters of fatty acids are formed using methanol and alkali and separated by gas – liquid chromatography using a flame ionisation detector. The elution pattern of methyl esters can be compared with authentic oils for identification,” the document states.
It also lists the microscopic examination of fat crystals. “On crystallisation these glycerides exhibit a characteristic crystalline appearance when viewed under microscope.” The size and shape of the crystals depend upon the strength of solution, amount of fat taken and the time allowed for crystallization, the documents notes.
What is the FSSAI test for the adulteration of ghee?
In 2019, the FSSAI issued an order that stated Reversed Phase - High Performance Liquid Chromatography or RP-HPLC was to be used to detect if ghee had been adulterated with vegetable oils. This method, the FSSAI order says, is “based on the detection of cholesterol and β-Sitosterol as markers in the unsaponifiable matter (USM) of pure ghee and adulterated ghee samples.” β-Sitosterol serves as an indicator for the adulteration in ghee by certain vegetable oils/fats.
The FSSAI document states that in pure/genuine ghee, no peak of β-Sitosterol is expected to be found. This test is applicable for the determination of soybean oil, coconut oil, sunflower oil and groundnut oil in ghee, it says.
What do the lab reports say?
Two available reports say that the samples tested are of cow ghee, received on July 17, and with the analysis completed on July 23. The results state that the samples do not comply with the requirements of FSSAI for the tested parameters. Of the several tests the samples were put through, the parameters that did not comply are highlighted. One is the purity of milk fat, another is saponifaction value, a third is β-Sitosterol and the others are the presence of various acids.
Saponification value (SV) is the number of milligrams of potassium hydroxide (KOH) required to saponify one gram of fat or oil. It is a measure of the average molecular weight of fatty acids in a given sample, and is an important index of oil quality.
The FSSAI states that the saponifaction value of ghee should be between 205 and 235. Both lab reports show higher saponification values: one of 249.644 and the other of 241.952.
Both reports also said the samples had β-Sitosterol, possibly indicating adulteration with certain vegetable oils/fats.
ALSO WATCH Watch | Tirupati laddu row: What’s the BJP’s dilemma? | Talking Politics with Nistula Hebbar
The animal fat issue
The purity of the milk fat is detailed in the annexure of the reports, and it is this annexure that lists the various contaminants that may be present including beef tallow and lard.
The annexure lists a range of ‘Standard S value limits’ and states that if any S-value of the sample given falls outside of these limits, then the sample is deemed to contain a ‘foreign fat’. The S - value is a mathematical equation used to determine the integrity of milk fat in dairy products and can be used to determine adulterants.
S1 is adulteration with: soya bean, sun flower, olive, rape seed, lin seed, what germ, maize germ, cotton seed, fish oil. S2 is with coconut and palm kernel fat. S3 is with palm oil and beef tallow, S4 is with lard and S5 is the total adulterated fat.
As per the annexure, all of the S-values of the samples tested fall outside of the ranges listed, indicating the presence of foreign fats.
However which specific foreign fat it was, and the amounts of foreign fats found in the sample are unclear. For instance, we do not know how much of what may have been sunflower oil or beef tallow or cotton seed oil or a combination of foreign fats was found.
The annexure, it should be noted, also lists a number of circumstances under which the results may give a false positive.
What does the lab report mean
Food safety scientist V. Pasupathy says the issue boils down to economics. Good quality cow ghee, he says, is priced at over ₹700 per kg. If the dairy supplying the temple had priced it at ₹320 per kg as has been reported, then that is a strong indication that the ghee was not of good quality and was possibly compromised.
The usual adulterant used in ghee, he explains, is hydrogenated vegetable oil, generally palm oil (dalda or vanaspati) as it is similar in texture, and, a common person cannot tell the difference, especially when cow ghee flavouring agents, which are available in the market, are added.
Another possibility, he says, is cross-contamination from the dairy – if the dairy was also involved in manufacturing and processing other products, this could have led to contamination.
In the Turpati laddu case, he points out, the foreign fat that the lab has detected could be any one or more of the many adulterants it has listed. “The normal protocol is to test for the presence of adulterants. This only tells you whether the ghee is pure or adulterated – with any one of, or a number of things. It does not tell you which adulterant has been used or how much, unless you then do another set of specific tests to find out. Generally, no one spends money on finding out which adulterant there was – the fact that the ghee was adulterated itself is the problem. As per information available to the public at present, it is not known if any further tests were done [in the case of the Tirupatti laddu ghee],” he says.
The most likely possibility, he says, is that the ghee was adulterated with a vegetable oil. However, other possibilities cannot be ruled out and only further, specific tests to check for each of these possible adulterants may give the answer.
Published - October 01, 2024 03:50 pm IST ghee adulteration lab_test pending_test India, Tirupati ghee fflo:hasAdulterant beef tallow ghee used to make the laddoos was contaminated, possibly with animal fats such as beef tallow ghee fflo:hasAdulterant lard ghee used to make the laddoos was contaminated, possibly with animal fats such as beef tallow and lard lab report on ghee contamination fflo:foundIn ghee lab report had indicated that ghee used to make the laddoos was contaminated lard fflo:hasPermissibleLimit saponification value 192 to 198 Lard, the FSSAI says, means the rendered fat from hogs and shall not contain more than one percent of substances other than fatty acids and fat. It should have a saponification value varying from 192 to 198 and iodine value from 52 to 65. It may also contain permitted food additives. β-Sitosterol fflo:detectedBy Reversed Phase - High Performance Liquid Chromatography Reversed Phase - High Performance Liquid Chromatography or RP-HPLC was to be used to detect if ghee had been adulterated with vegetable oils. This method, the FSSAI order says, is “based on the detection of cholesterol and β-Sitosterol as markers in the unsaponifiable matter (USM) of pure ghee and adulterated ghee samples.” S-value fflo:producesIndicator foreign fat if any S-value of the sample given falls outside of these limits, then the sample is deemed to contain a ‘foreign fat’ ghee fflo:hasAdulterant hydrogenated vegetable oil The usual adulterant used in ghee, he explains, is hydrogenated vegetable oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil The usual adulterant used in ghee, he explains, is hydrogenated vegetable oil, generally palm oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod addition of cow ghee flavouring agents especially when cow ghee flavouring agents, which are available in the market, are added ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable oil ghee was adulterated with a vegetable oil Tirupati laddu fkg:hasIngredient ghee using gram flour, sugar, cashews, cardamom, ghee and raisins Tirupati laddu fkg:hasIngredient gram flour using gram flour, sugar, cashews, cardamom, ghee and raisins Tirupati laddu fkg:hasIngredient sugar using gram flour, sugar, cashews, cardamom, ghee and raisins Tirupati laddu fkg:hasIngredient cashews using gram flour, sugar, cashews, cardamom, ghee and raisins Tirupati laddu fkg:hasIngredient cardamom using gram flour, sugar, cashews, cardamom, ghee and raisins Tirupati laddu fkg:hasIngredient raisins using gram flour, sugar, cashews, cardamom, ghee and raisins beef tallow fflo:hasDefinition made by removing, simmering and clarifying fatty tissue that surrounds the organs of ruminant animals Beef tallow is made by removing, simmering and clarifying fatty tissue beef tallow fflo:hasDefinition white-ish, solidifies when cooled and has a texture similar to that of butter It is white-ish, solidifies when cooled and has a texture similar to that of butter beef fat fflo:hasDefinition fat obtained from a beef carcass beef fat or suet means fat obtained from a beef carcass beef fat fflo:hasPermissibleLimit saponification value 193 to 200 saponification value varying from 193 to 200 beef fat fflo:hasPermissibleLimit iodine value 35 to 46 iodine value from 35 to 46 lard fflo:hasDefinition rendered fat from hogs Lard, the FSSAI says, means the rendered fat from hogs lard fflo:hasPermissibleLimit substances other than fatty acids and fat max 1% shall not contain more than one percent of substances other than fatty acids and fat lard fflo:hasPermissibleLimit iodine value 52 to 65 iodine value from 52 to 65 ghee fflo:hasAdulterant edible vegetable oil Common adulterants include edible vegetable oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant hydrogenated fats Common adulterants include edible vegetable oil, hydrogenated fats ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal body fats Common adulterants include edible vegetable oil, hydrogenated fats, animal body fats and starchy substances. ghee fflo:hasAdulterant starchy substances Common adulterants include edible vegetable oil, hydrogenated fats, animal body fats and starchy substances. animal body fat fflo:detectedBy gas liquid chromatography gas liquid chromatography can be used for this test animal body fat fflo:detectedBy microscopic examination of fat crystals It also lists the microscopic examination of fat crystals microscopic examination of fat crystals fflo:producesIndicator characteristic crystalline appearance exhibit a characteristic crystalline appearance when viewed under microscope vegetable oils fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee adulteration of ghee in India – both with vegetable and animal fats tallow fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee adulteration of ghee in India – both with vegetable and animal fats Reversed Phase - High Performance Liquid Chromatography fflo:producesIndicator β-Sitosterol β-Sitosterol serves as an indicator for the adulteration in ghee by certain vegetable oils/fats groundnut oil fflo:detectedBy Reversed Phase - High Performance Liquid Chromatography This test is applicable for the determination of soybean oil, coconut oil, sunflower oil and groundnut oil in ghee ghee fflo:hasPermissibleLimit PermissibleLimit_SV_Ghee FSSAI states that the saponifaction value of ghee should be between 205 and 235 PermissibleLimit_SV_Ghee fflo:forProperty Saponification value saponifaction value of ghee should be between 205 and 235 ghee fflo:hasAdulterant β-Sitosterol samples had β-Sitosterol, possibly indicating adulteration with certain vegetable oils/fats ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod cross-contamination from dairy Another possibility, he says, is cross-contamination from the dairy ghee fflo:hasAdulterant foreign fat the foreign fat that the lab has detected could be any one or more of the many adulterants163:Ta67,'Don't bring gods into Tirupati issue': SC questions Chandrababu Naidu govt over Tirupati laddoo ghee row - BusinessToday businesstoday.in The Supreme Court has finally waded into the ongoing row over adulterated ghee used in preparing the highly sought-after 'prasadam' at the Tirupati temple in Andhra Pradesh.
However, taking a critical stance on the issue, the apex court, which is hearing a clutch of petitions on the row, told the Solicitor General Tushar Mehta, who is representing the Andhra Pradesh government on the issue, that the court 'expects gods to be kept out of the issue."
Mehta was arguing that the controversy over adulterated ghee was unacceptable as it was a matter of faith. "“It is matter of faith. If contaminated ghee was used, its unacceptable,” he had said.
In response, the court asked Mehta: “What was the proof to show that contaminated ghee was used in preparation of laddoos.”
The row erupted when, earlier this month, Andhra Pradesh CM Chandrababu Naidu had come out with the explosive allegation that under the Jagan Mohan Reddy government, ghee comprising of animal fat was used to prepare the highly revered 'prasadam.' This allegation ignited a storm of controversy, with deputy CM Pawan Kalyan saying that 'those who don't have reverence' for the Sri Venkateswara Temple -- a subtle dig at Jagan's religion -- allowed this sacrilege to happen. He then went on a purification ritual to cleanse the temple of the 'sin'.
The SC bench, comprising of Justices BR Gavai and KV Viswanathan, further observed that the lab reports, which formed the basis of the conclusion that animal fat was present in the ghee used for preparing laddus, prima facie suggest that the tested samples were from supplied ghee, not the ghee used in preparing the prasadam.
The court has sought the Centre's response on whether the Special Investigation Team (SIT) established by the state government should continue probing the allegations. The matter has been scheduled for further hearing on October 3, with the court directing the state to refrain from any involvement until then. ghee adulteration animal fat court hearing alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat ghee comprising of animal fat was used animal fat fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee ghee comprising of animal fat was used ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat conclusion that animal fat was present in the ghee animal fat in ghee fflo:supportedBy lab reports lab reports, which formed the basis of the conclusion that animal fat was present in the ghee laddoos fkg:hasIngredient ghee ghee used in preparing the highly sought-after 'prasadam'164:T1e20,Supreme Court questions CM Naidu for Tirupati laddus adulteration claims opindia.com On 30th September, the Supreme Court of India criticised Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu for making allegations publicly about the use of adulterated ghee in the preparation of laddus offered as prasadam at the Tirumala Tirupati Temple. The court questioned whether the comments made in public by CM Naidu were appropriate, as the investigation into the matter was still underway. During the hearing, the court noted that there was no proof that the contaminated ghee was used in the preprations of the Laddus.
Luthra (reads): A false positive can be obtained…method is not applicable to…
— Live Law (@LiveLawIndia) September 30, 2024
J Viswanathan: Does not prudence dictate that you take a second opinion? Normal things, we take second opinion. No proof that said ghee was used.#SupremeCourt #Tirupati
Allegations and lab reports
CM Naidu alleged that ghee adulterated with animal fat and other foreign substances was used under the previous YSRCP government to prepare the Tirupati laddus. During the hearing, it was noted that the ghee samples which were tested were rejected and not used for the preparation of the laddus. The court questioned whether such public comments by the CM were warranted.
The two-judge bench, comprising Justice BR Gavai and KV Viswanathan, was hearing the petitions seeking an investigation into the controversy over the use of adulterated ghee in Tirupati laddus. The Solicitor General of India, Tushar Mehta, was instructed by the court to consult the Government of India on whether a central investigation was necessary in the matter. The next hearing has been scheduled for 3rd October.
Religious sentiments and political statements
Raising concerns about the comments made by the CM, the court highlighted their potential to affect the sentiments of millions of devotees worldwide. Furthermore, during the hearing, the court noted that the Chief Executive Officer of the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam (TTD) denied the allegations that adulterated ghee was used in the preparation of the laddus.
Notably, Senior Advocate Siddharth Luthra, representing TTD in court, clarified that the ghee used in June and early July was not tested, leaving a scope for assertions. However, it was the ghee from two tankers delivered on 6th and 12th July that was found to be contaminated, and that ghee was not used, as alleged by the CM.
Court’s questions: Gods and politics
During the hearing, the court raised concerns about the involvement of political figures in religious matters, especially when an investigation is underway. Justice Viswanathan pointed out that the lab report was inconclusive and hinted that the rejected ghee was tested, not the ghee used in the prasadam. Justice Gavai added that political figures should refrain from making statements that could harm the sentiments of millions of devotees.
Rohatgi: We have lab reports
— Live Law (@LiveLawIndia) September 30, 2024
J Viswanathan: [Report] is not at all clear. If you had already ordered investigation, what was the need to go to press? Report came in July, statement came in Sept#SupremeCourt #Tirupati
“When you hold a constitutional office, we expect the gods to be kept away from politics,” said Justice Gavai, echoing the court’s concern over political interference in religious issues. Both justices questioned whether the statement was necessary, given that an investigation had already been ordered by the CM’s office.
J Gavai: When you hold constitutional office, it is expected that you would…we expect Gods to be kept away from polity
— Live Law (@LiveLawIndia) September 30, 2024
J Viswanathan: Unless you were sure, how did you go to public with that? What was the purpose of investigation?#SupremeCourt #Tirupati
Special investigation or central probe?
The core issue in court is to determine whether the ongoing investigation by the State’s Special Investigation Team is sufficient, or whether the investigation should be handed over to an independent central agency.
Subramanian Swamy, one of the petitioners in the case, argued that the statement made by the CM was without substantial evidence and could have far-reaching consequences. He further noted that statements from high-ranking officials should be responsible and carefully measured. He questioned whether a fair and impartial investigation would be possible after the CM’s public comments.
In his petition, Swamy accused Naidu of using the matter for political gains against the previous YSRCP government. This was refuted by Senior Advocate Mukul Rohatgi, who represented the Andhra Pradesh government in court. He countered the allegations, asserting that it was Swamy’s petition that was politically motivated.
Tirupati Laddu Prasadam controversy
On 18 September Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister Chandrababu Naidu accused the previous YS Jagan Mohan Reddy administration of using animal fat in making laddus served at the renowned Hindu temple during his address at the National Democratic Alliance (NDA) legislative party meeting. “They (YSRC government) not only provided substandard food to the devotees, such as Anna Prasadam in Tirumala, but also used inferior quality ingredients to make Prasadam, which is offered to Lord Venkateswara. Instead of using pure ghee, they used animal fat,” he charged.
The chief minister further added, “Today, we are using pure ghee and cleansed the system in the temple. Quality of Prasadam and food have improved and steps are being taken to make further improvements.” His statement was eventually validated by the test findings. The conclusions drawn by the report revealed that there were residues of animal fat in the ghee used to prepare iconic Tirupati laddu prasadam. Furthermore, ingredients like soybean, sunflower, olive, rapeseed, linseed, wheat germ, maize germ, cotton seed, coconut, palm kernel fat, and palm oil were also used in making the laddus.
After that, a laboratory report emerged, which showed that ghee used by the Tirupati temple contained beef fat, pig fat, fish oil, and various types of plant-based oil, and the content of dairy fat was very low. The test was conducted by the National Dairy Development Board’s “Centre of Analysis and Learning in Livestock and Food” (CALF) laboratory on behalf of Tirumala Tirupathi Devastanam. TTD had decided to test the ghee after receiving multiple complaints about the deteriorating quality and taste of its famous laddus.
TTD has already started blacklisting the suppliers of ghee after the report came out. ghee adulteration substitution animal fat beef fat pig fat fish oil investigation alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India Tirupati laddus fkg:hasIngredient ghee use of adulterated ghee in Tirupati laddus ghee fflo:hasAdulterant contaminated ghee ghee from two tankers delivered on 6th and 12th July that was found to be contaminated animal fat fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee Instead of using pure ghee, they used animal fat beef fat fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee ghee used by the Tirupati temple contained beef fat inconclusive finding fflo:supportedBy lab report lab report was inconclusive using animal fat fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional accused the previous YS Jagan Mohan Reddy administration of using animal fat Tirupati laddu prasadam fflo:hasAdulterant beef fat ghee used by the Tirupati temple contained beef fat Tirupati laddu prasadam fflo:hasAdulterant pig fat ghee used by the Tirupati temple contained beef fat, pig fat, fish oil Tirupati laddu prasadam fflo:hasAdulterant fish oil ghee used by the Tirupati temple contained beef fat, pig fat, fish oil165:Taec,Tirupati Laddus Controversy: Understanding Supreme Court's Observations On Ghee Adulteration Claims In Four Points swarajyamag.com The Supreme Court on Monday (30 September) heard a bunch of petitions seeking an independent or court-monitored investigation into allegations of adulteration of Tirupati laddus and sought Solicitor General (SG) Tushar Mehta's advice.
1. Probe: The two-judge bench, consisting of Justices K V Viswanathan and B R Gavai, stated that it would be appropriate for the SG to assist in determining whether the already-appointed Special Investigation Team (SIT) should continue its work or if the investigation should be conducted by an independent agency.
The SIT was formed by the Andhra Pradesh government after Chief Minister Chandrababu Naidu alleged that 'beef tallow, fish oil and lard (pig fat) was found in ghee used to make Tirupati laddus when Y S Jagan Mohan Reddy was the CM.
2. Naidu: However, the court noted, "We are prima facie of the view that when the investigation was under process, it was not appropriate on the part of high constitutional functionary to make a statement which can affect public sentiments."
3. TTD: The Supreme Court noted the statement of the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) Board that such adulterated ghee was never used to make prasadam for the temple.
4. Ghee: Regarding the adulteration of ghee, the court noted that the ghee supplied in tankers in June till 4 July, supplied by the same supplier, was not sent to analysis but only those received on 6 July were sent to NDDB for testing.
"It's submitted that in all four samples, ghee was found to be adulterated. Further, a statement made by the CEO is only for the tankers supplied on 6 July and 12 July. It's submitted that ghee in tankers supplied in June till 4 July was used in making of laddus," the court said.
The matter will be next heard on 3 October. The petitions have been filed by senior BJP leader Dr Subramanian Swamy, Rajya Sabha MP and former TTD chairman YV Subba Reddy and historian Dr Vikram Sampath and spiritual discourser Dushyanth Sridhar.
Nishtha Anushree is Senior Sub-editor at Swarajya. She tweets at @nishthaanushree. ghee adulteration fish oil lard investigation alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant fish oil fish oil and lard (pig fat) was found in ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant lard lard (pig fat) was found in ghee ghee fflo:inputTo laddu making ghee in tankers supplied in June till 4 July was used in making of laddus ghee fflo:hasAdulterant unspecified adulterant in all four samples, ghee was found to be adulterated ghee adulteration finding fflo:foundAtStep Distribution ghee supplied in tankers ghee analysis fso:isPerformedAt NDDB sent to NDDB for testing166:Ta00,SIT Intensifies Probe of Adulterated Ghee in Tirumala Laddus deccanchronicle.com Tirupati: The special investigation team has intensified its probe into allegations that adulterated ghee, possibly containing animal fat, was used in preparing the sacred Tirumala Srivari Laddus at the Lord Venkateswara Swamy temple.
Allegations were that adulterated ghee was supplied to the TTD, hurting the sanctity of the prasadam distributed to millions of devotees there.
The SIT, headed by Guntur range IG Sarvashresth Tripathi, has started the probe after the case was registered as 470/24 at the Tirupati East police station on Sunday.
The 9-member team, which includes DIG Gopinath Jatti, Kadapa SP Harshavardhan Raju and additional SP Venkat Rao, is investigating the quality of ghee supplied to TTD by the Tamil Nadu-based AR Dairy Foods Pvt. Ltd.
IG Tripathi said, "We will investigate the procurement process, the tendering procedure followed by the TTD, quality control steps at the temple and the test results. We will form internal teams to examine every angle.”
The SIT chief said all key individuals involved in the tendering and procurement process will be questioned and the findings would be submitted to the government at the earliest.
As part of its investigation, the SIT met TTD executive officer J. Syamala Rao at his official residence in Tirupati. Sources indicate that the EO has briefed the SIT team about the ongoing case and provided an official report on the ghee adulteration issue, which has already been submitted to the state government. The investigation team also met with TTD procurement officials and gathered information on various aspects of the ghee procurement process.
The SIT, operating from the police guest house in Tirupati, is looking into allegations that tender guidelines were altered during the YSRC term to favour specific suppliers, including AR Dairy. ghee adulteration animal fat probe alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat adulterated ghee, possibly containing animal fat ghee adulteration at Tirumala prov:wasAssociatedWith AR Dairy Foods Pvt. Ltd. investigating the quality of ghee supplied to TTD by the Tamil Nadu-based AR Dairy Foods Pvt. Ltd. animal fat fflo:foundAt Processing adulterated ghee, possibly containing animal fat, was used in preparing animal fat fflo:foundAt Distribution adulterated ghee, possibly containing animal fat, was used SIT probe on Tirumala ghee fflo:inRegion Tirupati Tirupati: The special investigation team has intensified its probe167:Taf7,Tirumala Prasadam row: SIT intensifies probe into Tirupati Balaji Laddu-ghee adulteration case | Vijayawada News - The Times of India indiatimes.com TIRUPATI: The special investigation team (SIT) constituted by the Andhra Pradesh govt has intensified its investigation into the use of adulterated ghee in the preparation of the sacred Tirupati Laddu prasadams at the iconic Lord Venkateswara Swamy temple at Tirumala.
The 9-member strong SIT includes Guntur range IG Sarvashresth Tripathi, Visakhapatnam DIG Gopinath Jatti, Kadapa SP V Harshavardhan Raju, additional SP Venkat Rao, and other subordinate officers.
Entrusted with the responsibility of investigating the sensational "Tirupati Laddu adulteration case," the SIT will be operating from the police guesthouse in Tirupati.
Guntur IG Sarvashresth Tripathi, who was appointed as the SIT chief, told reporters in Tirupati on Sunday that the case registered at the Tirupati east police station against Tamil Nadu-based AR Dairy Foods Private Limited, based on a complaint lodged by the 
Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams, was formally taken over by the SIT.
"Basically, this case is about supplying ghee adulterated with animal fats to the 
TTD by AR Dairy. We will form multiple internal teams to investigate various aspects related to the ghee procurement through the tender process adopted by the TTD, the quality parameters followed by the Tirupati trust, etc., as part of our investigation," Sarvashresth Tripathi added.
Amidst reports that the tender guidelines were allegedly altered by the previous TTD administration during the YSRCP regime in order to handpick a few ghee suppliers, eventually leading to the ghee adulteration row, is likely to come under the purview of the SIT investigation.
Meanwhile, the SIT officials formally met TTD EO J Syamala Rao at the latter's official bungalow in Tirupati on Sunday afternoon.
It is learnt that the TTD EO formally briefed the SIT officials about the entire case so far and also about the official report on the Laddu-ghee adulteration with animal fats episode, submitted by him to the state govt. ghee adulteration animal fats investigation alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India Tirupati Laddu ghee adulteration prov:used ghee use of adulterated ghee in the preparation of the sacred Tirupati Laddu ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fats supplying ghee adulterated with animal fats animal fats fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee ghee adulterated with animal fats ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fats Laddu-ghee adulteration with animal fats animal fats fflo:foundAt Processing preparation of the sacred Tirupati Laddu prasadams SIT investigation fflo:targets ghee investigation into the use of adulterated ghee Tirupati Laddu fflo:hasAdulterant animal fats Laddu-ghee adulteration with animal fats168:T19de,Laddus, and economics of ghee thehindubusinessline.com In the last few days, politics in Andhra Pradesh has been all about sub-standard or adulterated laddus. There is nothing really new about politics being mixed with gods and goddesses, playing with the sentiments of crores of devotees. But this time it is over the use of adulterated ghee for making laddus which are offered as prasad.
There was a similar controversy, about sub-standard ghee being used for making prasad, involving the famous Ambaji Temple in Gujarat, too. Ask anyone from the trade and industry and they will say “ghee adulteration” is rampant in India.
Incidents like this raise certain questions: Who is responsible for it or where does this all begin? Is it the processing units or weakness in the procurement mechanism of the institutions? Is there enough regulatory mechanism in place? Why should such situations arise at all? What is the way forward?
According to Rupinder Singh Sodhi, President of the Indian Dairy Association and former Managing Director of Gujarat Cooperative Milk Marketing Federation Ltd, “ whenever such an incident happens everybody starts commenting on who has gone wrong — the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) has not done its work or such-and-such institution hasn’t worked. But to avoid or minimise such happenings the whole supply chain has to take the responsibility.”
Right from milk producers (mainly dairy farmers), processors/manufacturers, retailers (general as well as organised trade, including online category) to consumers — retail consumers and institutions like temples, gurudwaras, caterers, etc — are all responsible, he said.
Sodhi has a point here, and similar sentiments were echoed by some of the major processors/producers of ghee.
What also needs to be brought into focus is the entire procurement process which institutions such as TTD had been following so far — though it is a e-tendering process it is based on the L1 model. If one goes by what players in the market have to say, pure ghee cannot be cheap; whoever is selling at a low price is definitely selling a sub-standard product.
Farmers affected
When rampant adulteration takes place, it also impacts dairy farmers’ income as they do not get their due price. For instance, if the real cost of producing 1 kg of ghee is ₹550 a kg and somebody after adulteration starts selling at ₹345, ₹350 or ₹400, then the farmer will be forced to reduce the real cost to compete with the adulterated produce.
It is a different story that with a good monsoon, green fodder prices are lower at ₹250/quintal against ₹350 in Haryana APMCs, currently.
But overall, if the Indian farmer is not able to get the real price for the produce it is because of the rampant adulteration happening across India by mischievous brands.
Says Sodhi, “As far as farmers are concerned, individually a farmer cannot do anything to avoid such happenings, but there are farmers’ cooperatives. They have to become more vigilant and bring to the notice of the authorities if such incidents come to light. Ultimately, if anything happens to any product segment in the dairy industry, it impacts everybody, not only the farmers.”
But, dairy processing units have a larger responsibility as incidents like this impact the reputation of the industry and the players, too. “They have to be very careful and vigilant about those bringing bad repute to the industry,” Sodhi said.
Considering that ghee is a commonly used ingredient in most Indian households, what can the regulators do? How can the guilty be punished? Agencies such as FSSAI and other labs should be more vigilant.
According to Sodhi, “as far as FSSAI is concerned they are regulating but they need to be more vigilant through their field forces to take such type of samples and test them. Also, the role of NABL, CALF Lab or the other acclaimed food laboratories is to keep educating FSSAI on the latest techniques of testing food products like, in this case, ghee.”
Finally, the buyer, whether individual or institutional, also has a big responsibility. Both have to be extra vigilant as such an essential food item as ghee does not come cheap, Sodhi added.
Procurement process
As for institutional buyers, they should not go for only open type of bidding, Sodhi said, adding that “they should first register manufacturers of ghee who have got a good track record and whose products have also been tested immediately after entering the market.”
Bids, it is argued, should not be for one- or two-year contracts. If you go for yearly contract, it is possible that prices go up during the course of the contract period, nudging the ghee manufacturer to indulge in adulteration to protect margins.
“Therefore, bidding should be called for from reputed suppliers who are registered, on monthly or bi-monthly basis,” Sodhi said.
For example , following the incident, TTD has opted for a new procurement process for pure ghee from recognised companies. Currently, the ghee is being purchased at ₹478/kg from suppliers like Nandini and Alpha Milk Foods. The ghee undergoes testing in NDDB and NABL-accredited labs for additional verification. A lab panel is also being formed. The FSSAI will soon establish a central lab to further ensure product safety. Those found selling substandard ghee have been blacklisted.
However, there is another option for procuring ghee, according to Sodhi. The institutions can procure from a reputed auction platform like National Cooperative Dairy Federation of India (NCDFI). This will ensure competition and only reputed brands are allowed to be sold.
Finally, the entire value chain has to be in-place — from farmers and processing facilities to retailers and the end consumer, whether individual or institution. Regulations can be in place but what is desired is more awareness and advocacy about the ill-effects of adulteration across the value chain.
Published on September 27, 2024 ghee adulteration testing pending_test Andhra Pradesh, India laddus fkg:hasIngredient ghee use of adulterated ghee for making laddus ghee testing fso:isPerformedAt NDDB The ghee undergoes testing in NDDB and NABL-accredited labs for additional verification. ghee testing fso:isPerformedAt NABL-accredited labs The ghee undergoes testing in NDDB and NABL-accredited labs for additional verification. NABL fflo:hasFunction educating FSSAI on latest testing techniques role of NABL... is to keep educating FSSAI on the latest techniques of testing FSSAI lkif:created_by central lab FSSAI will soon establish a central lab169:T11a6,Shocking Test Results: 1 in 5 Ghee Samples Found Impure in Hyderabad | Hyderabad News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Hyderabad: An investigation by food safety authorities into purity of ghee available in the market has revealed that one out of every five samples tested was either substandard or unsafe for consumption.
Out of the 70 samples collected randomly between January and September from various sources, including dairy farms, supermarkets and stores, 16 were found to be adulterated after multiple tests such as Baudouin, butyro refractometer reading, chemical and fat content analysis.
The tests assessed the purity of ghee by checking the fat percentage, presence of contaminants and existence of adulterants such as vanaspati hydrogenated fat, vegetable oil and animal fats.
"The tests were performed to ensure that the ghee samples met the required standards. During the testing process, we discovered adulterated ghee samples containing palm oil and vegetable fat, which compromised the purity and authenticity of the ghee, making it substandard and potentially harmful for consumption," said a senior food safety official.
The price of ghee in the market varies significantly, ranging from Rs 300 to Rs 1,000 per kg, based on purity. 
Although, only around 20% was discovered to be adulterated, most of the low-priced loosely sold products are not genuine, officials said.
Health experts too expressed concern about the practice of adulterating ghee with less expensive oils and fats. 
Consuming ghee with altered fatty acid composition can lead to an imbalance in essential nutrients. This alteration not only increases the caloric content but also contributes to various health issues such as obesity, high cholesterol levels, and elevated blood pressure, doctors said.
"The presence of adulterants in ghee causes digestive problems, including bloating and stomach discomfort. Regular consumption of adulterated ghee can have detrimental effects on the immune system, leading to chronic inflammation and oxidative stress within the body. If taken regularly, consumers will be at risk of cardiovascular disease, cancers, and neurological disorders in the long term," said Deepa Agarwal, founder of Nutriclinic Hyderabad.
Over 15,000 kg loose butter seized
A joint operation by special operations teams and food safety authorities led to confiscation of a substantial amount of milk and other ingredients from a butter production facility in Katedan which were suspected to be adulterated. The seized items included 15,000 kg loose butter, 7,280 kg packed butter, 105 kg ghee, 525 kg of milk powder, 89 kg of maida. All confiscated items have been sent for tests to determine their quality and compliance with regulations. ghee adulteration tested pending_test India, Hyderabad ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil adulterated ghee samples containing palm oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable fat adulterated ghee samples containing palm oil and vegetable fat ghee fflo:hasAdulterant less expensive oils and fats adulterating ghee with less expensive oils and fats adulterants in ghee fflo:causesEffect bloating presence of adulterants in ghee causes digestive problems, including bloating adulterants in ghee fflo:causesEffect stomach discomfort The presence of adulterants in ghee causes digestive problems, including bloating and stomach discomfort. ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vanaspati hydrogenated fat adulterants such as vanaspati hydrogenated fat ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable oil adulterants such as vanaspati hydrogenated fat, vegetable oil and animal fats ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fats adulterants such as vanaspati hydrogenated fat, vegetable oil and animal fats palm oil fflo:detectedBy Baudouin test multiple tests such as Baudouin ghee fflo:causesEffect obesity consumption of adulterated ghee... contributes to various health issues such as obesity adulterants in ghee fflo:causesEffect high cholesterol levels The presence of adulterants in ghee causes digestive problems ghee fflo:causesEffect elevated blood pressure consumption of adulterated ghee... contributes to various health issues such as... elevated blood pressure ghee fflo:causesEffect chronic inflammation Regular consumption of adulterated ghee... leading to chronic inflammation ghee fflo:causesEffect oxidative stress Regular consumption of adulterated ghee... leading to... oxidative stress ghee fflo:causesEffect cardiovascular disease consumers will be at risk of cardiovascular disease... in the long term16a:Tb11,Andhra Pradesh government issues G.O. constituting SIT to probe supply of adulterated ghee to TTD thehindu.com Andhra Pradesh Chief Secretary Neerabh Kumar Prasad has issued G.O. Rt. No. 1660, constituting a Special Investigation Team (SIT) to investigate the alleged supply of adulterated cow ghee to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD), used in the making of the prasadams.
Chief Minister N. Chandrababu Naidu had earlier announced that a SIT would conduct a proper investigation into the issue.
The SIT would be headed by Guntur Range IGP Sarvashresth Tripathi and comprise of Visakhapatnam Range DIG Gopinath Jatti; Kadapa district SP V. Harshavardhan Raju; Additional SP (Administration), Tirupati district, Venkat Rao; Deputy SP G. Sitarama Rao; Deputy SP J. Sivanarayana Swamy; SB inspector, Annamayya district, T. Satyanarayana; inspector, NTR District Police Commissionerate, Vijayawada, K. Umamaheswara; and CI of Kalluru, Chittoor district, M. Suryanarayana.
The G.O. issued on September 26 empowered the SIT to investigate the case as it needs to establish the truth. It also instructed all the departments to cooperate with the SIT for smooth investigation.
The Chief Secretary said, “The SIT may call for relevant information and assistance from any department of the government in the course of the investigation. All government departments shall cooperate with the SIT in discharge of its duties and duly submit any information or technical assistance called for. Similarly, the SIT may seek any external expert assistance duly requesting the DGP.”
The case was being investigated on the complaint lodged at the Tirupati East Police Station by General Manager (Procurement), TTD, regarding adulteration of ghee used for preparation of the Srivari laddu and other prasadams.
The Chief Secretary further said, “The TTD is a revered institution for devotees worldwide. The Srivari laddu and other prasadams offered at the temple hold immense religious significance, symbolising purity and devotion. Recent reports of adulteration of the ghee used for the preparation of Srivari laddu and other prasadams have deeply hurt the sentiments of millions of devotees. In the light of the gravity of the situation, the government, in accordance with its commitment to protecting the sanctity of the TTD, has considered it necessary to constitute the SIT for detailed and comprehensive investigation of the entire issue.”
Published - September 27, 2024 09:02 pm IST ghee adulteration unknown investigation alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India Srivari laddu fkg:hasIngredient ghee ghee used for preparation of the Srivari laddu prasadams fkg:hasIngredient ghee ghee used for preparation of the Srivari laddu and other prasadams ghee fflo:hasAdulterant adulterant adulteration of ghee used for preparation16b:T7ef,TTD complaint on AR Dairy for allegedly supplying adulterated ghee newindianexpress.com VIJAYAWADA: The TTD lodged a complaint with police against Tamil Nadu-based AR Dairy Foods Private Limited for allegedly supplying adulterated ghee.
In a written complaint, TTD’s marketing and procurement wing general manager Murali Krishna said AR Dairy violated the tender agreement by supplying adulterated ghee even though higher officials had flagged the low quality. Police said as per the agreement, the TTD can file a criminal case against the supplier if terms agreed upon are violated.
‘Ghee supplied by AR Dairy did not meet standards’
Stating that the TTD purchases ghee for preparation of Swamivari Laddu and other Prasadams as per Dittam, the complaint read, “We expect values, quality, and authenticity. We were disheartened to discover that the ghee supplied by AR Dairy Food Private Limited, Dindigul, recently did not meet the expected standards.
Ghee is an essential part of the preparation of Swamivari Laddu and other Prasadams as per Dittam and its quality directly affects both health, religious sentiments, and beliefs of crores of devotees of Lord Sri Venkateswara. Adulterated ghee not only compromises taste, but can also pose serious health risks to devotees. We were made to believe that AR Dairy Food Private Limited has been maintaining strict quality control measures to ensure that their products meet safety and quality standards, but the sample results were otherwise.”
Besides explaining the process of inviting tenders for the supply of ghee, the quoted price by AR Dairy, the contract, and samples of ghee collected and tested by NDDB CALF, the TTD also attached the test results and conditions it had set for ghee quality. ghee adulteration complaint alleged Tamil Nadu, India adulterated ghee fflo:causesEffect health risks Adulterated ghee not only compromises taste, but can also pose serious health risks to devotees ghee fflo:hasAdulterant unspecified adulterant supplying adulterated ghee16c:T93a,Over 5,500 Kg Of Spurious Ghee Seized In Indore Ahead Of Navratri freepressjournal.in Indore (Madhya Pradesh): Ahead of Navratri and Diwali, the administration in Indore on Thursday raided a private firm and seized over 5,500 kg of spurious ghee, said an official from the Madhya Pradesh's food department.
Officers Say
Food Safety Officer Manish Swamy said 5,520 kg of substandard ghee, estimated to be worth about Rs 7 lakh, was seized from a firm operating from a house in Veer Savarkar Nagar in the city.
Prima facie, it appears that the spurious ghee was prepared by mixing the synthetic essence of ghee with palm oil, soybean oil and other edible oils, he said.
According to the official, the substandard ghee was being sold under different local brand names.
The administration in the state's financial capital has sealed the firm and samples of the spurious ghee are being sent to a laboratory in Bhopal for tests, he said. ghee adulteration palm oil soybean oil synthetic essence of ghee seized sealed alleged Indore, Madhya Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil spurious ghee was prepared by mixing the synthetic essence of ghee with palm oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant soybean oil spurious ghee was prepared by mixing the synthetic essence of ghee with palm oil, soybean oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant synthetic essence of ghee spurious ghee was prepared by mixing the synthetic essence of ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod mixing synthetic essence with edible oils spurious ghee was prepared by mixing the synthetic essence of ghee with palm oil, soybean oil and other edible oils Seizure of spurious ghee in Indore fflo:inRegion Indore Over 5,500 Kg Of Spurious Ghee Seized In Indore mixing synthetic essence with edible oils fflo:hasFraudType Substitution spurious ghee was prepared by mixing the synthetic essence of ghee with palm oil, soybean oil and other edible oils mixing synthetic essence with edible oils fflo:hasFraudType Dilution spurious ghee was prepared by mixing the synthetic essence of ghee with palm oil, soybean oil and other edible oils mixing synthetic essence with edible oils fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional spurious ghee was prepared by mixing the synthetic essence of ghee with palm oil Seizure of spurious ghee in Indore fflo:foundAtStep Processing raided a private firm and seized over 5,500 kg of spurious ghee16d:T73d,Tirumala laddu row: TTD lodges police complaint against AR Dairy for ‘supplying adulterated ghee’ thehindu.com The Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) on September 25 (Wednesday) lodged a complaint against the Dindigul-based AR Dairy for supplying adulterated ghee used in the preparation of laddu prasadams at the Tirumla temple.
TTD General Manager in-charge (procurement) Murali Krishna lodged a complaint with the East Police Station against the dairy for violating the supply norms.
TTD Executive Officer J. Syamala Rao recently announced that four tankers of ghee supplied by AR Dairy were rejected on suspicion of adulteration. He warned of initiating criminal proceedings in the case.
The Andhra Pradesh government on September 24 (Tuesday) constituted a SIT headed by Guntur Range DIG Sarvasresta Tripathi to probe the alleged adulteration and submit a detailed report.
Nandini ghee reaches Tirumala
Meanwhile, tankers carrying Nandini ghee from Karnataka Milk Federation (KMF) have reached Tirumala. The TTD recently placed an order for the supply of around 10 lakh kgs of ghee with the KMF.
Published - September 25, 2024 08:07 pm IST ghee adulteration police_complaint SIT_constitution alleged Tirumala, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India supplying adulterated ghee by AR Dairy prov:wasAssociatedWith AR Dairy complaint against the Dindigul-based AR Dairy for supplying adulterated ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant unspecified adulterant supplying adulterated ghee ghee adulteration at Tirumala prov:used ghee adulterated ghee used in the preparation of laddu prasadams rejection of four tankers of ghee fflo:foundAtStep Distribution tankers of ghee supplied by AR Dairy were rejected SIT probe into ghee adulteration fflo:issuedBy Andhra Pradesh government Andhra Pradesh government ... constituted a SIT ... to probe the alleged adulteration16e:T1c8e,TTD files plaint against AR Dairy for supplying adulterated ghee to Tirupati temple deccanchronicle.com Advertisement  
Tirupati: TTD  has filed a police complaint against Tamil Nadu-based AR Dairy Foods Pvt Ltd,  accusing the company of supplying adulterated ghee for use in the preparation  of its laddu prasadam.
 
The complaint, lodged with the Tirupati East police on Wednesday, comes after the recent row over use of substandard ghee for prasadam preparations at the Tirumala temple.
 
TTD executive officer, Syamala Rao, recently said four tanker loads of ghee supplied by AR Dairy had been rejected due to suspicions of adulteration. He said criminal charges might be filed in the matter.
According to the complaint lodged by TTD general manager for procurement, Muralikrishna, the temple had placed an order for 10 lakh kg of ghee with AR Dairy Foods on May 15 for its use in laddu preparations. The company delivered four batches of ghee between June 12 and July 6. These initially passed traditional quality checks but were not examined for adulteration then.
 
The issue came to light as TTD received numerous complaints from devotees about the poor quality of laddu prasadam.
This prompted the temple management to conduct a more detailed investigation by sending the received ghee samples to the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) for a comprehensive testing.
The NDDB results reportedly revealed the presence of foreign fats in the ghee, including animal fat.
 
Following these findings, TTD issued show-cause notices to AR Dairy Foods on July 22, 23 and 27, seeking an explanation. However, the dairy company denied any wrongdoing. It issued a statement on Sept 4, rejecting any adulteration.
Despite the AR Dairy Foods’ denial, TTD has decided to blacklist the company and shift its ghee procurement to the Karnataka Milk Federation and the Alpha Dairy to ensure the quality of the laddu prasadam.
 
The reports about use of adulterated ghee sparked political tensions, with chief minister N Chandrababu Naidu putting the blame on the previous government led by the YSRC, alleging negligence in handling the matter.
 
In response, former chief minister YS Jagan Mohan Reddy accused Naidu of using the situation for political gain and spreading misinformation.
 
The Naidu-led government has set up an SIT, headed by Police IG, Sarvashresht Tripathi, for a thorough investigation into the case.
The complaint, lodged with the Tirupati East police on Wednesday, comes after the recent row over use of substandard ghee for prasadam preparations at the Tirumala temple.
TTD executive officer, Syamala Rao, recently said four tanker loads of ghee supplied by AR Dairy had been rejected due to suspicions of adulteration. He said criminal charges might be filed in the matter.
According to the complaint lodged by TTD general manager for procurement, Muralikrishna, the temple had placed an order for 10 lakh kg of ghee with AR Dairy Foods on May 15 for its use in laddu preparations. The company delivered four batches of ghee between June 12 and July 6. These initially passed traditional quality checks but were not examined for adulteration then.
The issue came to light as TTD received numerous complaints from devotees about the poor quality of laddu prasadam.
This prompted the temple management to conduct a more detailed investigation by sending the received ghee samples to the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) for a comprehensive testing.
The NDDB results reportedly revealed the presence of foreign fats in the ghee, including animal fat.
Following these findings, TTD issued show-cause notices to AR Dairy Foods on July 22, 23 and 27, seeking an explanation. However, the dairy company denied any wrongdoing. It issued a statement on Sept 4, rejecting any adulteration.
Despite the AR Dairy Foods’ denial, TTD has decided to blacklist the company and shift its ghee procurement to the Karnataka Milk Federation and the Alpha Dairy to ensure the quality of the laddu prasadam.
The reports about use of adulterated ghee sparked political tensions, with chief minister N Chandrababu Naidu putting the blame on the previous government led by the YSRC, alleging negligence in handling the matter.
In response, former chief minister YS Jagan Mohan Reddy accused Naidu of using the situation for political gain and spreading misinformation.
The Naidu-led government has set up an SIT, headed by Police IG, Sarvashresht Tripathi, for a thorough investigation into the case.
( Source : Deccan Chronicle )
Next Story ghee adulteration show-cause notices to AR Dairy Foods lab_confirmed India, Tirupati ghee fflo:hasAdulterant foreign fats presence of foreign fats in the ghee show-cause notices to AR Dairy Foods fflo:issuedBy TTD TTD issued show-cause notices to AR Dairy Foods comprehensive testing fso:isPerformedAt National Dairy Development Board sending the received ghee samples to the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) for a comprehensive testing IncidentFinding: foreign fats in ghee fflo:foundIn ghee NDDB results reportedly revealed the presence of foreign fats in the ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant foreign fats presence of foreign fats in the ghee comprehensive testing fso:isPerformedAt National Dairy Development Board sending the received ghee samples to the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) for a comprehensive testing show-cause notices to AR Dairy Foods fflo:issuedBy TTD TTD issued show-cause notices to AR Dairy Foods ghee adulteration at Tirupati temple prov:wasAssociatedWith AR Dairy Foods Pvt Ltd accusing the company of supplying adulterated ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant adulterant supplying adulterated ghee laddu prasadam fkg:hasIngredient ghee use of substandard ghee for prasadam preparations ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat including animal fat IncidentFinding: foreign fats in ghee prov:wasAttributedTo AR Dairy Foods NDDB results reportedly revealed the presence of foreign fats in the ghee blacklisting AR Dairy Foods fflo:issuedBy TTD TTD has decided to blacklist the company SIT investigation fflo:issuedBy Naidu-led government Naidu-led government has set up an SIT IncidentFinding: foreign fats in ghee fflo:triggeredAction show-cause notices to AR Dairy Foods Following these findings, TTD issued show-cause notices ghee adulteration at Tirumala temple prov:wasAssociatedWith AR Dairy Foods Pvt Ltd four tanker loads of ghee supplied by AR Dairy had been rejected due to suspicions of adulteration ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat including animal fat foreign fats fflo:foundAt Processing presence of foreign fats in the ghee foreign fats fflo:foundAt Processing presence of foreign fats in the ghee ghee adulteration at Tirumala temple fflo:hasFraudType Substitution presence of foreign fats in the ghee, including animal fat NDDB results revealing foreign fats in ghee fflo:triggeredAction police complaint The complaint, lodged with the Tirupati East police on Wednesday, comes after the recent row over use of substandard ghee reports about use of adulterated ghee prov:wasAttributedTo AR Dairy Foods reports about use of adulterated ghee blacklisting AR Dairy Foods fflo:issuedBy TTD TTD has decided to blacklist the company SIT investigation fflo:issuedBy Naidu-led government The Naidu-led government has set up an SIT16f:Tde1,Concerns Over Ghee Quality at Srikalahasti Temple after Tirumala Scandal deccanchronicle.com Tirupati: Concern over suspected use of adulterated ghee in temple prasadam has escalated, with complaints that this could be happening in the Srikalahasti Temple and several other shrines across Andhra Pradesh.
The alleged use of adulterated ghee in the Tirumala laddu prasadam is currently under a high-level investigation by the state government.
The Srikalahasti temple requires around eight tonnes of ghee every month for prasadam and rituals. Complaints about the quality of ghee used there have been raised for years by devotees and temple staff. They claim that the ghee lacked its signature aroma, taste and colour. Temple staff said the ghee solidified even during the summer months, strengthening the suspicions about its quality.
While these concerns were being brought to the attention of temple authorities, no significant action has been taken so far. However, the raising of the Tirumala ghee issue has heightened the concern at Srikalahasti. This prompted the state endowments department to order inspections of the ghee and other ingredients being supplied to various temples, including Srikalahasti.
Prior to the change in the state government three months ago, the Srikalahasti temple used to source its ghee from well-known brands like Vijaya and Nandini. The temple currently procures its ghee from the Vaishnavi and Tirumala brands. Contractors from Tirupati are supplying the required quantities.
Devotees have questioned the decision of the new dispensation to switch from established brands like Vijaya and Nandini to the newer suppliers.
"Between April 1 and July 31, 2023, Vaishnavi and Tirumala ghee were supplied at `497 per kg. From August 1, 2023, to March 31, 2024, Vaishnavi ghee was being supplied at `569 per kg. Despite the availability of more affordable options from the earlier brands, it is unclear why the temple trust board switched the suppliers," said a temple official.
Temple authorities had stated that quality control measures would be improved after Srikalahasti MLA Bojjala Sudheer Reddy inspected temple departments and expressed dissatisfaction over the prasadam's quality.
However, these promises remain unfulfilled. In addition, concern about transparency and quality checks on temple supplies persists.
"There is no dedicated team or mechanism in place to inspect items like rice, pulses and ghee. This raises fears that substandard products might be used," lamented former MLA SCV Naidu, demanding a thorough investigation to safeguard the integrity of the prasadam.
Responding to these issues, the MLA alleged that the previous temple administration had sourced ghee from a fake company with the name, Vaishnavi Dairy. “After assuming office, I ensured that the ghee was procured from the genuine Vaishnavi Dairy.”
He also said the quality of ghee and of the other supplies would be inspected by a vigilance committee. ghee adulteration substandard adulterated ghee inspections of the ghee suspected Srikalahasti, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India inspections of the ghee fflo:issuedBy state endowments department state endowments department to order inspections of the ghee and other ingredients being supplied to various temples suspected use of adulterated ghee in temple prasadam fflo:inRegion Andhra Pradesh suspected use of adulterated ghee in temple prasadam has escalated, with complaints that this could be happening in the Srikalahasti Temple and several other shrines across Andhra Pradesh170:Tfa9,TTD files police complaint against firm for suppling adulterated ghee hindustantimes.com TTD files police complaint against firm for suppling adulterated ghee
he complaint was lodged with the Tirupati town police after the government set up a special investigation team (SIT)
HYDERABAD: The Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD), which manages the Lord Venkateshwara temple at Tirumala, on Wednesday filed a formal police complaint against Tamil Nadu-based dairy firm, AR Dairy Foods Pvt Ltd, for allegedly supplying adulterated ghee to the temple in July this year, people familiar with the matter said.
The complaint was lodged with the Tirupati town police after the government set up a special investigation team (SIT) headed by inspector general of police Sarvashresht Tripathi to probe into the recent allegations of adulteration of ghee used in the making of “laddu prasadam”.
In his complaint, TTD general manager (procurement) P Muralikrishna said the temple management placed an order with AR Dairy Foods on May 15 for supply of 10 lakh kg of ghee to the temple for making of laddu prasadam. The firm supplied four tankers of ghee on June 12, 20 and 25 and July 6.
“The TTD used this ghee for making of prasadam after conducting the quality testing of this ghee using old methods, but it did not go in for adulteration testing. In view of the various complaints from pilgrims over the lack of quality of laddu, the TTD decided to get the adulteration test done at National Dairy Development Board (NDDB),” Muralikrishna said.
Accordingly, TTD collected the ghee samples from four tankers supplied by AP Dairy Foods on July 6 and June 12 and sent them to NDDB labs for adulteration testing.
“The reports indicated that the ghee samples had tested positive for presence of vegetable and animal fat,” he said in the complaint.
Muralikrishna said show-cause notices were issued to the company on July 22, 23 and 27 seeking an explanation. The company responded on September 4, denying the adulteration charge. Subsequently, the TTD ordered for an inquiry, he said.
Meanwhile, the YSR Congress party headed by former chief minister Y S Jagan Mohan Reddy, which has been the target of chief minister N Chandrababu Naidu over the adulterated ghee row, said Naidu’s allegatoins were driven by political motives and had deeply hurt the sentiments of devotees.
“In light of this, the party is calling for participation in temple poojas on September 28th to purify Tirumala’s sacredness and restore the honour of Lord Venkateswara’s prasadam,” Reddy said in a post on X.
Jagan urged people to oppose Naidu’s false claims that Tirumala’s sacred laddu prasadam was adulterated with animal fat. It not only misled devotees, but also tarnished the revered image of Lord Venkateswara, he said.
- Srinivasa Rao is Senior Assistant Editor based out of Hyderabad covering developments in Andhra Pradesh and Telangana . He has over three decades of reporting experience. ghee adulteration vegetable fat animal fat police complaint show-cause notices special investigation team (SIT) alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable fat ghee samples had tested positive for presence of vegetable and animal fat ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat ghee samples had tested positive for presence of vegetable and animal fat adulteration testing fso:isPerformedAt NDDB labs sent them to NDDB labs for adulteration testing ghee fflo:hasAdulterant adulterant in ghee supplying adulterated ghee ghee adulteration act prov:used ghee supplying adulterated ghee vegetable fat fflo:detectedBy adulteration testing reports indicated that the ghee samples had tested positive for presence of vegetable and animal fat animal fat fflo:detectedBy adulteration testing reports indicated that the ghee samples had tested positive for presence of vegetable and animal fat TTD fflo:triggeredAction show-cause notices Muralikrishna said show-cause notices were issued to the company171:Te98,Tirupati Prasadam row: TTD lodges police complaint against AR Dairy Foods for supplying adulterated ghee with animal fats | Vijayawada News - Times of India indiatimes.com TIRUPATI: 
Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams lodged a police complaint against Tamil Nadu-based AR dairy foods private limited, located in Dindugal, for supplying ghee adulterated with animal fats to the Tirupati trust.
It may be recalled that AR Dairy Foods, which was awarded the ghee supply contract for the first time in May this year by the 
TTD, had supplied about ten tankers of ghee in June and July this year. 
This ghee was to be used in the preparation of the sacred Tirupati Laddu and other Naivedya prasadams at the world-renowned Tirumala temple.
However, after TTD drew samples from four tankers and sent them for tests to the NDDB CALF, lab reports confirmed that the ghee was adulterated with lard (pig fat), fish oil, palm oil, and beef tallow.
While the TTD immediately blacklisted AR Dairy Foods and the Andhra Pradesh chief minister made a startling revelation to the devotees about the use of ghee adulterated with animal fats in the making of the sacred Tirupati Laddu prasadams last week, there was a severe backlash from the devotees of Lord Venkateswara worldwide, demanding stringent action against all involved in this act of degeneration.
And while the TTD conducted a Shanti Homam and Samprokshanam at the hill temple on Monday to ward off the sinful effects of the use of animal fats in the ghee used in the preparation of Srivari prasadams, the state govt constituted a SIT (Special Investigation Team) to conduct a deeper investigation into the alleged nexus and conspiracy.
While the AP govt-appointed SIT is about to start its investigation into the ghee adulteration row, TTD's general manager for procurement, Murali Krishna, lodged a formal police complaint against AR dairy foods private limited at the Tirupati East police station on Wednesday.
In his complaint, the TTD GM alleged that by supplying ghee adulterated with animal fats to the TTD, AR dairy foods grossly violated all the tender norms, thereby causing anguish and agony among millions of devotees across the globe.
He further appealed to the police to also investigate the alleged nexus and conspiracy involved in this case. ghee adulteration animal fats fish oil lard palm oil beef tallow police complaint blacklisting Special Investigation Team investigation lab_confirmed Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India fish oil fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee ghee was adulterated with lard (pig fat), fish oil, palm oil, and beef tallow ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fats supplying ghee adulterated with animal fats Ghee Adulteration Act prov:used ghee supplying ghee adulterated with animal fats Ghee Adulteration Finding fflo:identifies lard lab reports confirmed that the ghee was adulterated with lard Ghee Adulteration Finding fflo:identifies fish oil lab reports confirmed that the ghee was adulterated with lard (pig fat), fish oil, palm oil, and beef tallow Ghee Adulteration Finding fflo:identifies palm oil lab reports confirmed that the ghee was adulterated with lard (pig fat), fish oil, palm oil, and beef tallow Ghee Adulteration Finding fflo:identifies beef tallow lab reports confirmed that the ghee was adulterated with lard (pig fat), fish oil, palm oil, and beef tallow ghee adulteration incident prov:wasAttributedTo AR dairy foods private limited lodged a formal police complaint against AR dairy foods private limited AR Dairy Foods fflo:violates tender norms grossly violated all the tender norms SIT investigation fflo:issuedBy AP govt state govt constituted a SIT SIT investigation fflo:targets ghee investigation into the ghee adulteration row172:Tc55,FSSAI mulls state-of-the-art food lab in Tirumala deccanchronicle.com Tirupati: To improve food safety at one of India's most revered pilgrimage sites, the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) is considering the establishment of a state-of-the-art laboratory in Tirumala. The proposed facility aims to test the quality of raw materials procured by the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD), ensuring that the millions of devotees visiting the hill shrine of Lord Venkateswara receive safe and high-quality prasadam.
The idea was proposed earlier but gained increased attention following a controversy involving the renowned Tirumala laddu. After Chief Minister N. Chandrababu Naidu alleged that adulterated ghee, containing animal fat, was used in the laddus during the previous government’s tenure, several individuals, including former Union minister Suresh Prabhu, called for the establishment of FSSAI labs at all the public places where prasadam is distributed.
"The FSSAI must set up food testing labs at all public places where prasad is distributed to ensure quality and meet public expectations," Suresh Prabhu said on social media platform X. He suggested that institutions overseeing mass feeding programs could bear the costs of these facilities. Sources reveal that the FSSAI is prepared to invest approximately Rs 22 crore in a 12,000 sq. foot laboratory at Tirumala.
The facility, according to sources, is expected to house advanced equipment worth Rs 9 crore, a Rs 5 crore microbiology setup, and other instruments valued at Rs 6 crore. “During the FSSAI’s 41st Central Advisory Committee meeting in Tirupati, authorities expressed support for setting up a dedicated lab in Tirumala, given the daily influx of thousands of pilgrims. The lab will ensure food and water quality for devotees and improve the management of the laddu-making unit and annaprasadam centre, in collaboration with the temple authorities,” a TTD official said.
TTD executive officer J. Shyamala Rao has already started talks with FSSAI about leveraging their expertise in raw material procurement and testing. With the TTD spending thousands of crores on various food items annually, including Rs 800 crore solely on ghee, this move is seen as essential for upholding the highest food safety standards. "The new lab will help us to follow the FSSAI norms in our raw material procurement and implement standard operating procedures to improve food safety," Rao explained. He has reportedly approved plans for a two-story building to house the new facility, pending final clearances. It is learnt that the Institute of Preventive Medicine, under the state's health department, is expected to facilitate the agreement between FSSAI and TTD for the lab's establishment. ghee adulteration allegation alleged India, Tirumala animal fat fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee adulterated ghee, containing animal fat FSSAI norms lkif:created_by FSSAI follow the FSSAI norms in our raw material procurement TTD fflo:compliesWith FSSAI norms help us to follow the FSSAI norms TTD prov:wasAssociatedWith laddu-making unit improve the management of the laddu-making unit173:T136d,Campaign to curb adulteration in desi ghee, butter launched across Uttarakhand indiasnews.net Dehradun (Uttarakhand) [India], September 25(ANI): On the instructions of Chief Minister Pushkar Singh Dhami and Health Minister Dr. Dhan Singh Rawat, the Food Safety and Drug Controller Department has started a comprehensive campaign to curb adulteration in desi ghee and butter across the state. The campaign has started in all the districts of the state.
As per a statement from CMO on Monday along with desi ghee and butter, samples were also taken from sweet shops. Health Secretary and Food Commissioner R Rajesh Kumar said that strict action will be taken against those selling adulterated ghee and butter in the State.
The Union Health Ministry has written a letter to all the states and directed to take samples of laddus and investigate them, as well as to investigate the ghee sold in the market.
Additional Commissioner of Food Department Tajbar Jaggi said that a state-wide campaign has been started to curb adulterated ghee and butter. Instructions were given to the officers to raid sweet shops and shops selling desi ghee and butter in all the districts.
Action has been started regarding which. Samples of ghee and butter of many companies have also been taken by the investigation team. Further action will be taken after the test report of the sample comes. This campaign is being conducted under the leadership of the Deputy Commissioner of the Division and the District Designated Officer.
In which Senior Food Safety Officer, Food Safety Officer will collect legal and surveillance samples of local and various brands of ghee and butter by conducting intensive inspection of manufacturing units, storage vendors located in the state.
Raid campaign was conducted under the leadership of Deputy Commissioner RS Rawat in Garhwal Division. Desi ghee and butter were tested at various places in Dehradun district. Samples of various samples were collected and sent to the lab for testing.
Apart from the urban areas of Dehradun district, intensive raid campaign was also conducted in rural areas Herbertpur, Sahaspur, Sudhowala. Senior FSO Ramesh Singh, Santosh Singh, Sanjay Tiwari, DO Manish Singh were present in the raid team.
At the same time, in Kumaon Division, under the leadership of Food Safety and Drug Administration Deputy Commissioner Anoj Kumar Thapliyal, the team conducted intensive inspection campaign of the main ghee sellers/wholesalers/distribution establishments of the city to prevent the sale and storage of adulterated ghee in Haldwani area and samples were sent to the lab for testing.
During the campaign, the team inspected the establishments of wholesale sellers of ghee located at Mangal Padav, Kaladhungi Road and Rampur Road, Haldwani. Deputy Commissioner Anoj Kumar Thapliyal said that a total of four samples of different brands of ghee - Paras, Pehelwan, Mother Dairy and Health Made Desi Ghee etc. were collected and a sample of Nova brand skimmed milk powder was sent to the lab for testing. Action will be taken accordingly on receipt of the test report. At the same time, a sample of ghee was also collected by Senior Food Safety Officer, Ramnagar Aslam Khan. (ANI) ghee butter adulteration Campaign to curb adulteration in desi ghee and butter suspected Dehradun, Uttarakhand, India Campaign to curb adulteration in desi ghee and butter fflo:targets desi ghee campaign to curb adulteration in desi ghee Campaign to curb adulteration in desi ghee and butter fflo:targets butter campaign to curb adulteration in desi ghee and butter ghee and butter samples fflo:collectedAt manufacturing units collect legal and surveillance samples of local and various brands of ghee and butter by conducting intensive inspection of manufacturing units Desi ghee and butter testing in Dehradun fflo:inRegion Dehradun district Desi ghee and butter were tested at various places in Dehradun district Campaign to curb adulteration in desi ghee and butter fflo:issuedBy Food Safety and Drug Controller Department Food Safety and Drug Controller Department has started a comprehensive campaign Directive to sample laddus and ghee fflo:issuedBy Union Health Ministry Union Health Ministry has written a letter to all the states and directed to take samples Directive to sample laddus and ghee fflo:targets laddus directed to take samples of laddus Directive to sample laddus and ghee fflo:targets desi ghee investigate the ghee sold in the market butter samples fflo:collectedAt fflo:Processing collect legal and surveillance samples of local and various brands of ghee and butter by conducting intensive inspection of manufacturing units butter samples fflo:collectedAt Distribution samples of local and various brands of ghee and butter Nova brand skimmed milk powder sample fflo:collectedAt Distribution sample of Nova brand skimmed milk powder was sent to the lab Paras fflo:belongsToCategory ghee samples of different brands of ghee - Paras174:Ta34,FSSAI Issues Notice to Ghee Supplier deccanchronicle.com Tirupati: The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) has issued a show-cause notice to A.R. Dairy Foods Private Limited, based in Tamil Nadu, for allegedly supplying adulterated ghee to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD). The ghee is used to prepare the Tirupati laddu.
The controversy arose after Chief Minister N. Chandrababu Naidu accused the previous government, led by Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy, of using substandard ingredients, including ghee mixed with animal fats such as fish oil and beef tallow. TTD executive officer J. Syamala Rao confirmed that A.R. Dairy Foods had supplied the adulterated ghee.
FSSAI’s actions stem from reports by the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) in Anand, Gujarat, which indicated that samples of ghee from A.R. Dairy Foods did not meet the required safety standards and contained foreign fats. A senior health ministry official stated, “The action was taken after four samples from A.R. Dairy Foods failed to meet food safety standards.”
The FSSAI notice specifically questions why A.R. Dairy Foods’ central licence should not be suspended under the Food Safety and Standards (Food Products Standards and Food Additives) Regulation, 2011. According to the notice, the director of the Institute of Preventive Medicine in Mangalagiri reported that A.R. Dairy Foods has been supplying ghee to TTD for the past four years.
The notice also noted that the samples tested at the NDDB laboratory did not meet the required standards, leading TTD to blacklist the company. A.R. Dairy Foods has been instructed to provide an explanation by Monday regarding the potential suspension of its license. Failure to submit a satisfactory response may result in further legal action by the FSSAI. ghee adulteration fish oil show-cause notice alleged Tirupati, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant fish oil ghee mixed with animal fats such as fish oil FSSAI show-cause notice fflo:issuedBy FSSAI The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) has issued a show-cause notice ghee fflo:hasAdulterant beef tallow ghee mixed with animal fats such as... beef tallow ghee adulteration incident fflo:foundIn ghee supplying adulterated ghee to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams ghee adulteration incident fflo:foundAtStep Distribution supplying adulterated ghee to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams Ghee Adulteration Finding prov:wasAttributedTo A.R. Dairy Foods Private Limited samples tested at the NDDB laboratory did not meet the required standards, leading TTD to blacklist the company175:T9e1,Tirupati laddu row: FSSAI issues show cause notice to ghee supplier siasat.com The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) has issued a show cause notice to Tamil Nadu-based A R Dairy Foods Private Limited for allegedly supplying adulterated ghee to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD), used in the preparation of Tirupati laddu.
The issue gained attention after chief minister N Chandrababu Naidu accused the previous government of using substandard ingredients, including ghee adulterated with animal fats like fish oil and beef tallow.
TTD executive officer J Syamala Rao confirmed the supply of adulterated ghee from A R Dairy Foods.
The FSSAI’s action followed reports from the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) in Gujarat, which found that ghee samples from AR Dairy Foods failed safety standards and contained foreign fats.
A senior health ministry official stated that four samples from the company did not meet the necessary food safety criteria.
The FSSAI notice questions why A.R. Dairy Foods’ central license should not be suspended under the Food Safety and Standards (Food Products Standards and Food Additives) Regulation, 2011. According to the director of the Institute of Preventive Medicine in Mangalagiri, AR Dairy Foods has supplied ghee to TTD for the past four years.
The company has been blacklisted by TTD following the substandard results from NDDB testing. AR Dairy Foods has until Monday to provide an explanation for the potential suspension of its licence, with further legal action possible if the response is unsatisfactory. ghee adulteration show_cause_notice pending_test India, Tirupati ghee fflo:hasAdulterant fish oil ghee adulterated with animal fats like fish oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant beef tallow ghee adulterated with animal fats like fish oil and beef tallow fish oil fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee ghee adulterated with animal fats like fish oil beef tallow fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee ghee adulterated with animal fats like fish oil and beef tallow ghee fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy ghee samples from AR Dairy Foods ghee adulteration incident fflo:foundIn ghee supply of adulterated ghee from A R Dairy Foods NDDB testing finding fflo:identifies foreign fats ghee samples from AR Dairy Foods failed safety standards and contained foreign fats ghee adulteration incident fflo:supportedBy National Dairy Development Board reports from the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) in Gujarat, which found that ghee samples from AR Dairy Foods failed safety standards176:T114c,Yogi Govt Mandates Nameplates At Food Shops In UP, Enforces Stricter Food Safety Regulations freepressjournal.in In response to alarming incidents of food adulteration across the country, Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath has instructed state authorities to take strict and immediate action against those tampering with food products. The government has introduced a new mandate requiring food establishments to prominently display the name and details of their operators and proprietors.
Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath issued these directives during a high-level meeting with the Food Department on Tuesday, emphasizing the need to improve transparency and ensure the safety of food across the state.
The new rules, aimed at increasing accountability in the food industry, will make it mandatory for hotels, dhabas, and restaurants to display nameplates with the operator’s name and address at their premises. Additionally, comprehensive police verification of all employees working in these establishments will be required to ensure the safety and hygiene of food services.
The directive comes after reports surfaced of food items such as juice, lentils, and bread being contaminated with human waste and other unsanitary substances. Yogi Adityanath condemned these incidents as “gruesome” and warned that such malicious actions have severe consequences for public health.
“These acts of food adulteration with inedible or harmful substances are unacceptable and pose a significant threat to the health of the common man. Strict and immediate measures must be taken to prevent such incidents in Uttar Pradesh,” the Chief Minister said.
Tougher Food Safety Regulations
CM Yogi also stressed the importance of amending the Food Safety Act to ensure stricter measures for maintaining the purity of food items. In his address, he stated, “All food establishments across Uttar Pradesh should be thoroughly investigated to ensure the safety and quality of food. Police verification of every employee is essential, and necessary changes should be made to the existing food safety laws.”
Under the new guidelines, food businesses will also be required to install CCTV cameras throughout their premises. These cameras must cover not only customer seating areas but also kitchens and food preparation zones. The footage should be stored securely and made available to local authorities or law enforcement as needed.
Furthermore, all employees at food establishments will be required to wear masks and gloves while preparing and serving food, as part of enhanced hygiene protocols. This step is aimed at curbing any potential contamination and ensuring public health safety.
Past Controversies and Legal Challenges
This is not the first time the Uttar Pradesh government has issued similar directives. Earlier, nameplates were made mandatory for shops along the Kanwar route, which led to legal challenges. The matter eventually reached the Supreme Court, where the court issued a stay on the Yogi government's decision. The case is still pending in court.
However, this new order, focusing on food establishments, has been introduced in the wake of rising concerns about food adulteration. The recent incident involving the use of adulterated ghee in prasad at the Tirupati temple in Andhra Pradesh has further heightened awareness of food safety issues. ghee prasad adulteration adulterated ghee alleged Andhra Pradesh, India juice fflo:hasAdulterant human waste juice, lentils, and bread being contaminated with human waste lentils fflo:hasAdulterant human waste food items such as juice, lentils, and bread being contaminated with human waste bread fflo:hasAdulterant human waste bread being contaminated with human waste prasad fflo:hasAdulterant adulterated ghee use of adulterated ghee in prasad human waste fflo:causesEffect severe consequences for public health such malicious actions have severe consequences for public health hotels fflo:compliesWith new mandate requiring food establishments to display nameplates mandatory for hotels, dhabas, and restaurants to display nameplates dhabas fflo:compliesWith new mandate requiring food establishments to display nameplates mandatory for hotels, dhabas, and restaurants to display nameplates restaurants fflo:compliesWith new mandate requiring food establishments to display nameplates mandatory for hotels, dhabas, and restaurants to display nameplates177:T1676,FSSAI Issues Show Cause Notice to Ghee Supplier Over Adulteration Allegations in Tirupati Laddu etemaaddaily.com Urdu
Matrimonials
Classifieds
World
Business
Sports
Entertainment
Health
Crime
Edu and Jobs
Politics
Photos
Videos
Menu
Home
>
World
>
National
Hyderabad
National
International
Specials
Thu 01 Jan 1970
Share
Tweet
No Comments For This Post, Be first to write a Comment.
Leave a Comment
Most viewed from
National
Humayun Kabir summoned over controversial remarks after CM’s warning...
Rapido driver beaten to death over Rs 8k in Delhi...
Passenger Held With Rs 1.47 Cr Gold Hidden in Delhi Airport Washroom...
Man’s House Vandalised After Fleeing With Married Woman in Karnataka...
Congress Seeks Action Against Rajnath Singh Over Pahalgam Statement...
President Murmu confers AVSM on Lt Gen Neeraj Varshney...
Kerala Assembly urges centre to reform NEET, national examination system...
PM Modi presents iconic Indian handicrafts, textiles to Seychelles leadership...
Maharashtra FDA suspends six eateries over food safety violations...
Sonam Wangchuk's Health Worsens as CJP Protest Enters 11th Day...
Maharashtra farmer gets 1 paisa under PM-Kisan scheme...
Ayodhya police seek 5 years of bank records of accused 'Ram mandir donation theft case'...
Most viewed from
World
Burglars loots gold and cash worth lakhs from Kismatpur house...
Attapur police nabs two thieves for stealing motorcycle...
Visa Applicants Crowd Centres as India Resumes Tourist Visas for Bangladesh...
Dr Jagannath Nayak appointed as DRDO Director General...
Sanjay Jaju officially takes charge as new Chief Secretary...
Special Court acquits Raja Singh '2022 Prophet Muhammad remarks case'...
Cyberabad police issue traffic advisory for Rythu Bharosa event...
Applications Open for Anganwadi Teacher, Helper Posts In Gadwal...
Piyush Goyal 'UPI services have gone live in Greece'...
Saroornagar house damaged after mysterious blast, no casualties...
Telangana Considering Incentives to Boost Rice Exports, says Uttam...
Sanjay Jaju Meets CM Revanth Ahead of Assuming Charge...
Todays Epaper
English Weekly
AIMIM News
Asaduddin Owaisi 'PM Modi Should Attend Khamenei Funeral'
Jun 25, 2026
Asaduddin Owaisi Demands EC Accept PAN, Driving Licence And Ration Cards For Verification In SIR
Jun 11, 2026
AIMIM Qutbullapur President Mohammed Muneeruddin interact with locals of Bachupally residents over absence of worship places
Jun 07, 2026
Latest Urdu News
SIR-2026 میں اردو فارم کی فراہمی پر تلنگانہ ہائی کورٹ نے الیکشن کمیشن سے جواب طلب کرلیا
اتر پردیش کے کاس گنج میں ٹرینر طیارہ حادثے کا شکار، خاتون ٹرینی پائلٹ زخمی
حیدرآباد: ایک ہی دن HYDRAA کو تجاوزات اور غیر قانونی تعمیرات سے متعلق 54 شکایات
آسام میں شدید بارشوں سے ریلوے پل کا حصہ منہدم
شیخ حسینہ کا وطن واپسی کا اعلان، دو سال بعد بنگلہ دیش لوٹنے کی تیاری
نلگونڈہ ضلع میں سڑک حادثہ، تین کاریں اور ایک موٹر سائیکل آپس میں ٹکرا گئے
تلنگانہ: آرمور میں اردو استاد پر مبینہ حملہ، بی جے پی کارکنوں کے خلاف کارروائی کا مطالبہ
مہاراشٹر ٹی ای ٹی امتحان پرچہ لیک کے شبہ میں ملتوی، نئی تاریخ جلد جاری ہوگی
مہاراشٹر ٹی ای ٹی پرچہ لیک معاملہ: صدر مجلس کی بی جے پی حکومت پر سخت تنقید
این سی ای آر ٹی نے 1975 کی ایمرجنسی کو نویں جماعت کے سوشل سائنس نصاب کا حصہ بنا دیا
تلنگانہ حکومت کا بڑا اقدام، سرکاری اور عارضی ملازمین کے لیے مفت انشورنس اسکیم کا آغاز
مرکزی حکومت کا بڑا فیصلہ، یکم جولائی سے پاسپورٹ فیس میں بھاری اضافہ
تلنگانہ کے 3.38 کروڑ ووٹروں تک پہنچیں گے اینیومریشن فارم، گھر گھر سروے کا آغاز
ایس آئی آر قواعد پر صدر مجلس کی تنقید، ووٹروں کے لیے دستاویزات کی شرط پر وضاحت کا مطالبہ
سکندرآباد کے سپنا لوک کمپلیکس میں خوفناک آتشزدگی
Most Viewed
San Francisco Turns to AI to Safeguard Whales From Ship Strikes
May 21, 2026
'US must respond': Trump admits Iran shot down Apache helicopter over Strait of Hormuz
Jun 10, 2026
Google 'North Korean hackers using AI to find cybersecurity blind spots'
May 12, 2026
Trump gives 'Clock ticking' warning to Iran, says to act fast or nothing will be left of them
May 17, 2026
Trump greets PM Modi on completing 12 years in office, says 'Strong, wise man'
Jun 11, 2026
Woman sets house on fire to frame relatives, dies of burns in UP
May 20, 2026
'Protect seafarers': PM flags sailors' safety at G7 Summit in Trump's presence
Jun 17, 2026
Sajjanar Launches India?s First AI Multilingual Complaint Recorder
May 23, 2026
Govt says adequate fuel stocks available amid panic buying in several states
May 26, 2026
How do you feel about rising prices today?
Like Us
Etemaad Daily
Home
About Us
Advertise With Us
All Polls
Epaper Archives
Privacy Policy
Contact Us
Download Etemaad App
© 2026 Etemaad Daily News, All Rights Reserved. ghee adulteration show_cause_notice alleged Tirupati, Andhra Pradesh, India Show Cause Notice to Ghee Supplier fflo:issuedBy FSSAI FSSAI Issues Show Cause Notice to Ghee Supplier suspension of six eateries fflo:issuedBy Maharashtra FDA Maharashtra FDA suspends six eateries178:Te97,Tirupati laddu row: FSSAI issues show cause notice to ghee supplier, asks why its... dnaindia.com INDIA
The regulator asked the firm to send its reply by September 23 failing which it said suitable action will be initiated as per the Food Safety and Standards Act 2006 and Regulations.
In the wake of Tirupati Laddu adulteration allegations, the food regulator FSSAI has issued a show cause notice to a Tamil Nadu-based firm for allegedly supplying substandard ghee to Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam, official sources said on Monday.
In the notice, the food regulator asked A R Dairy Food Private Ltd why its central licence should not be suspended for contravention of the provisions of the Food Safety and Standards (Food Products Standards and Food Additives) Regulation, 2011.
According to the notice, FSSAI said it received information from The Director of the Institute of Preventive Medicine, Mangalagiri (Andhra Pradesh), that A R Dairy Food Private Ltd in Dindigul was one of the suppliers of Ghee to Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam (TTD) since last four years.
Further as per the information, the ghee procurement committee of TTD has sent all the samples supplied to TTD for testing to NDDB CALF Lab at Anand, Gujarat. "After analysis, the sample from your firm M/s. A R Dairy Food Private Ltd (FSSAI Central License number 10014042001610) has failed to meet the parameters and your firm has been blacklisted by EO, TTD," the notice said.
"By virtue of the above non-conformance of the product "Ghee" manufactured by your firm which is not meeting the standards, you have contravened the Food Safety and Standards Act 2006, Rules and Regulations made there under. "
"In view of all the above you are hereby directed to show cause as to why your central licence shall not be suspended for contravention of the above said provisions of the Food Safety and Standards (Food Products Standards and Food Additives) Regulation, 2011," the notice said.
The regulator asked the firm to send its reply by September 23 failing which it said suitable action will be initiated as per the Food Safety and Standards Act 2006 and Regulations. The issue came to light after Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister Chandrababu Naidu alleged on September 18 that the previous Y S Jagan Mohan Reddy-led government had used substandard ingredients and animal fat in Tirupati laddus.
	Naidu subsequently announced a Special Investigation Team to probe these claims. As the controversy continues to reverberate nationwide, various quarters are demanding steps to safeguard the sanctity of Hindu temples and their 'prasadam'. ghee adulteration substandard substandard ghee show cause notice alleged Dindigul, Tamil Nadu, India show cause notice fflo:issuedBy FSSAI FSSAI has issued a show cause notice to a Tamil Nadu-based firm ghee fflo:hasAdulterant substandard ghee allegedly supplying substandard ghee to Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam Tirupati Laddu adulteration incident fflo:triggeredAction show cause notice In the wake of Tirupati Laddu adulteration allegations, the food regulator FSSAI has issued a show cause notice Ghee sample failure at NDDB CALF Lab prov:wasAttributedTo A R Dairy Food Private Ltd sample from your firm M/s. A R Dairy Food Private Ltd has failed to meet the parameters A R Dairy Food Private Ltd fflo:foundAt Dindigul A R Dairy Food Private Ltd in Dindigul was one of the suppliers ghee sample analysis fso:isPerformedAt NDDB CALF Lab sent all the samples supplied to TTD for testing to NDDB CALF Lab at Anand ghee sample analysis fso:isPerformedOn ghee sample After analysis, the sample from your firm suspension of central licence fflo:issuedBy FSSAI directed to show cause as to why your central licence shall not be suspended179:Tef2,TTD to conduct santhi homam amid concerns over ghee quality for Srivari laddu newindianexpress.com TIRUPATI: Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) Executive Officer J Shyamala Rao explained that a Santhi Homam will be conducted on Monday from 6 AM to 10 AM at Yagasala near Bangaru Bavi (Golden Well) to address concerns among devotees regarding the presence of animal fat in the ghee used for making Srivari Laddu Prasadam.
Addressing the media at Padmavati Guest House in Tirupati on Sunday evening, along with the advisors of Agama Shastra, the EO stated that TTD is currently purchasing ghee at Rs 475 per litre from reputed suppliers, Nandini and Alfa Foods. The ghee samples taken from the both have been sent for testing at NDDB and yielded positive results. For reference, the reports indicating the quality of pure and adulterated ghee would be shared with the media to point out variations, he said.
He further explained, “We initiated the process of sending samples to NABL-accredited labs, as they are the only reliable source for testing adulteration. TTD currently has no facility to test for adulteration in ghee, and the testing capacity at our labs is insufficient. Therefore, for the first time, we have begun sending samples to NABL labs to ensure the quality of ghee used for Laddu Prasadam, and we will continue this practice.”
A sensory panel of 18 members, trained at Central Food Technological Research Institute (CFTRI) Mysore, has been deployed to evaluate the ghee based on colour, taste, and smell. Only ghee receiving a score of at least 7 out of 9 will be accepted for Prasadam making. Ghee with lower ratings will be rejected, he informed.
NDDB has offered to donate equipment worth Rs 75 lakhs to test the quality of ghee and adulteration, which is expected to be provided by December. Additionally, the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) has agreed to set up a lab in Tirumala. The building for the lab is already identified and the same was communicated with FSSAI. Rao emphasized that all necessary steps are being taken to ensure the quality of ghee used in Laddu Prasadam, and the current batch is made from pure ghee. Feedback from devotees who purchased the Laddu Prasadam has been positive, particularly regarding its colour, taste, and smell.
He also mentioned that Pavitrotsavam will be organized annually in Sravana Masam to seek the Lord’s forgiveness for any mistakes made by officials, priests, or devotees at Tirumala. This year, Pavitrotsavam was celebrated from August 15 to 17, with Samprokshana performed at Annaprashan Potu and Laddu Potu, and Pavitrams offered to Krishna Swami idols in Potu.
Under the guidance of Agama Shastra advisors, including Pedda Jiyangar, and following the suggestion of the Chief Minister Nara Chandrababu Naidu, a Santhi Homam is scheduled on Monday from 6 AM to 10 AM.
Three Homagundams will be arranged, and as part of the ritual, ‘Panchagavya Prokshana’ will be performed throughout the temple premises to dispel any doubts among devotees of Tirumala. ghee adulteration animal fat lab_setup alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India Srivari Laddu fkg:hasIngredient ghee ghee used for making Srivari Laddu Prasadam animal fat fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee concerns among devotees regarding the presence of animal fat in the ghee TTD prov:wasAssociatedWith ghee testing TTD is currently purchasing ghee... samples... sent for testing ghee sample analysis fso:isPerformedAt NABL-accredited labs sending samples to NABL-accredited labs SensoryTest fflo:producesIndicator colour evaluate the ghee based on colour, taste, and smell SensoryTest fflo:producesIndicator taste evaluate the ghee based on colour, taste, and smell SensoryTest fflo:producesIndicator smell evaluate the ghee based on colour, taste, and smell17a:Te06,Health Ministry issues show-cause notice to ghee supplier after Tirupati laddu row thehindubusinessline.com The Health Ministry has issued a show-cause notice to one of the companies that supplied ghee to the Tirupati temple, sources said. The notice has been sent by the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), the government’s food regulatory authority. Four samples of the concerned ghee-supplier were tested and all of them were found to be adulterated.
The temple had four ghee suppliers for making laddus and of these, samples of one of the suppliers were found to be reportedly adulterated.
The supplier came under scrutiny after a report by NDDB CALF, a private laboratory specialising in testing animal feed and dairy products, found that ghee samples used in these laddusccontained foreign fats and non-dairy products, including palm oil, fish oil, beef tallow, and lard (pig fat).
According to a senior Health Ministry official, ghee by definition “has to made from milk” and is considered as a “dairy product”. “Depending on the response, action will be taken against the supplier as per provisions of food regulation and adulteration acts in the country,” the official said.
In its notice, the FSSAI has sought reasons from the ghee-supplier as a to why its central license shall not be suspended “for contravention”. (businessline has reviewed a copy of the show-cause notice.)
Monkey Pox Case
Health Ministry sources confirmed that a 38-year-old from Kerala who contracted monkeypox has been infected with the MPOX Clade-I strain. This is the first case of the strain in the country. The Kerala resident had returned from UAE and contract tracing in reportedly under-way.
There are two distinct clades of the virus – Clade-I (which includes sub-categories like Clade 1a and 1b) and Clade-II with (subclades include IIa and IIb). In August, WHO declared MPOX outbreak a public health emergency of international concern.
Published on September 23, 2024 ghee adulteration show-cause notice pending_test India, Tirupati show-cause notice fflo:targets ghee issued a show-cause notice to one of the companies that supplied ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil ghee samples used in these laddus contained foreign fats and non-dairy products, including palm oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant fish oil ghee samples used in these laddus contained foreign fats and non-dairy products, including palm oil, fish oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant beef tallow ghee samples used in these laddus contained foreign fats and non-dairy products, including palm oil, fish oil, beef tallow, and lard ghee fflo:hasAdulterant lard ghee samples used in these laddus contained foreign fats and non-dairy products, including palm oil, fish oil, beef tallow, and lard ghee fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy ghee by definition has to made from milk and is considered as a dairy product show-cause notice fflo:issuedBy FSSAI The notice has been sent by the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) NDDB CALF report fflo:foundIn ghee report by NDDB CALF... found that ghee samples used in these laddus contained foreign fats NDDB CALF report fflo:identifies palm oil found that ghee samples used in these laddus contained foreign fats and non-dairy products, including palm oil show-cause notice to ghee supplier fflo:issuedBy FSSAI FSSAI has sought reasons from the ghee-supplier as a to why its central license shall not be suspended suspension of central license fflo:targets ghee sought reasons from the ghee-supplier as a to why its central license shall not be suspended17b:Ta9f,FSSAI sends show cause notice to company supplying ghee to Tirupati temple indianexpress.com FSSAI sends show cause notice to company supplying ghee to Tirupati temple
A R Dairy has been asked to file a reply by Monday, “failing which suitable action will be initiated as per food safety and standards act 2006 and regulations made there under”.
The country’s apex food safety regulator has sent a show cause notice to A R Dairy, which was one of the suppliers of ghee to the Sri Venkateswara temple in Tirupati, asking why its licence should not be suspended as its product allegedly did not meet the standards set for ghee.
According to the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India notice, the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) — which manages the Tirupati temple — sent the samples to Gujarat’s Centre for Analysis and Learning in Livestock and Food for testing.
This comes after allegations emerged that the ghee that was being used to make the laddoo offerings at the temple had been adulterated with animal fat. A R Dairy, a Tamil Nadu-based company, has denied allegations that their ghee was adulterated.
“After analysis, the sample from your firm … has failed to meet the parameters and your firm has been blacklisted. In view of all the above stated… show cause as to why your central licence shall not be suspended for contravention,” the notice said.
Out of the four ghee samples sent for analysis, one failed the tests, according to persons in the know.
The company has been asked to file a reply by Monday, “failing which suitable action will be initiated as per food safety and standards act 2006 and regulations made there under”.
The company holds a central licence that is valid till June 2029.
On Monday, rituals were conducted at the tanks used to store ghee in the temple, and the storage area where other ingredients that go into preparing the laddoos and other offerings to the deity are stored, as well as the kitchen, and the trays used to carry the offerings. ghee adulteration substandard animal fat show cause notice alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India show cause notice fflo:issuedBy FSSAI FSSAI sends show cause notice to company ghee adulteration allegation fflo:inRegion Tirupati allegations emerged that the ghee that was being used to make the laddoo offerings at the temple had been adulterated show cause notice fflo:targets ghee standards set for ghee IncidentFinding: ghee sample failed analysis fflo:triggeredAction RegulatoryAction: licence suspension notice show cause as to why your central licence shall not be suspended IncidentFinding: ghee sample failed analysis fflo:constitutes Violation: ghee parameters not met contravention17c:T21c3,Tirupati laddu row: Food safety regulator notice to ghee supplier rediff.com The country's food safety regulator has issued a show cause notice to a Tamil Nadu-based firm for allegedly supplying substandard ghee to temple authority Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam even as the chorus for a thorough probe and strict action over the alleged use of animal fat in Tirupati laddus grew louder.
On Monday, a four-hour ritualistic sanitisation was carried out at the revered shrine to propitiate Lord Venkateswara Swamy after alleged "sacrilegious practices such as mixing animal fats" in making Tirupati laddus (consecrated sweet) and others, temple sources said.
More petitions were filed on the issue in the Supreme Court. Former minister and BJP leader Subramanian Swamy sought a court-monitored inquiry into the issue and former Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) Chairman and YSRCP MP Y V Subba Reddy, who has denied the allegations of adulteration, asked for a probe by an independent committee under a retired Supreme Court judge.
The apex body of the Vishva Hindu Parishad (VHP), which met in Tirupati, also appealed to the Supreme Court to take suo motu cognisance of Tirupati laddu adulteration allegations.
Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister Chandrababu Naidu had on Sunday announced a Special Investigation Team to probe the allegations.
Stepping in, the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) has asked A R Diary Food Private Ltd why its central licence should not be suspended for contravention of the provisions of the Food Safety and Standards (Food Products Standards and Food Additives) Regulation, 2011, according to sources.
According to the notice, FSSAI said it received information from The Director of the Institute of Preventive Medicine, Mangalagiri (Andhra Pradesh), that A R Dairy Food Private Ltd in Dindigul was one of the suppliers of ghee to TTD for the last four years.
Further, as per the information, the ghee procurement committee of TTD has sent all the samples supplied to TTD for testing to NDDB CALF Lab at Anand, Gujarat, it said.
"After analysis, the sample from your firm M/s. A R Dairy Food Private Ltd (FSSAI Central License number 10014042001610) has failed to meet the parameters and your firm has been blacklisted by EO, TTD," the notice said.
"In view of all the above you are hereby directed to show cause as to why your central licence shall not be suspended for contravention of the above said provisions of the Food Safety and Standards (Food Products Standards and Food Additives) Regulation, 2011," it said.
The regulator asked the firm to send its reply by September 23 failing which it said suitable action will be initiated as per the Food Safety and Standards Act 2006 and Regulations.
Union Minister Chirag Paswan termed the alleged use of animal fat in Tirupati laddus as "worrying and condemnable" and said those involved would face stringent action to prevent such occurrences in the future.
Former Union minister Sharad Pawar said, "If anything was mixed, it is very wrong and action should be taken against those involved."
The controversy has sparked reactions across states. The famous Mankameshwar temple in Uttar Pradesh has now banned offerings of 'prasad' bought by devotees from outside and said they can offer homemade 'prasad' or fruits.
The temple's head seer, Devya Giri, on Monday said the distribution of "adulterated" 'prasad' in the Tirupati temple was an "unpardonable crime".
"There can be no bigger blow to Sanatan dharma. So, the administrators of all Hindu temples will have to make joint efforts to provide vegetarian prasad," Giri said.
Rajasthan had announced a drive from September 23 to 26 to check the purity of the bhogs and prasadams across temples in the state. Karnataka has already mandated the testing of temple prasadam and specified the use of only Nandini ghee for the preparation. In Uttar Pradesh, the Food Safety and Drug Administration (FSDA) has collected 13 samples of 'prasadam' from prominent temples in Mathura for testing.
Many political and religious leaders have called for strict measures to protect the sanctity of temples after Chief Minister Naidu alleged on September 18 that the previous Y S Jagan Mohan Reddy-led government had used substandard ingredients and animal fat in Tirupati laddus.
While YSRC chief Jagan Mohan Reddy has accused Naidu of lying and has written to Prime Minister Narendra Modi urging him to intervene, Deputy Chief Minister Pawan Kalyan on Monday said Reddy should desist from such "drama" and allow the law to take its own course so that culprits are punished.
"He (Reddy) being an ex-chief minister, he could have just said go ahead, whoever the perpetrators or culprits are, let them get punished. If he is very clean in his heart, there is no need to do all this drama. That's what I feel," Kalyan told PTI Videos at Janasena party office in Mangalagiri.
Kalyan had on Sunday commenced his 11-day penance to propitiate the deity over the alleged desecration.
Former chief minister and Congress leader Ashok Gehlot said the central government should form a committee under the chairmanship of a judge of the Andhra Pradesh High Court and expose the truth of this matter.
"This is a matter related to the faith and belief of crores of devotees of India," he said on X.
"Standard procedures should be laid down to ensure that work at any religious place is done in accordance with the traditions there," Gehlot said.
Samajwadi Party MP Dimple Yadav alleged that shops in Mathura are selling adulterated 'khoya' and demanded an inquiry.
She said adulteration in Tirupati laddu prasadam is a "very serious" matter and it has hurt the religious sentiments of people. "There are reports there that 'khoya' being sold in Mathura is also adulterated. The BJP government should institute Inquiry in both the cases," she said.
In Delhi, Consumer Affairs Secretary Nidhi Khare said her department will consider additional measures to monitor ghee quality in the market only after receiving the FSSAI report.
"We will wait for its report," Khare stated during a media briefing on the Modi 3.0 government's 100-day achievements.
She emphasised that food safety falls under FSSAI's purview, adding, "We should all wait for the FSSAI to take action."
Responding to queries about potential pre-festive season checks on ghee quality, Khare said, "We will take more action, if required, after the FSSAI report and provided there are consumer complaints on the National Consumer Helpline (NCH)."
Meanwhile, Swamy in his plea urged the ape court to issue an interim direction to obtain a detailed forensic report from the authorities concerned.
"Today, I filed a PIL seeking Supreme Court direction to investigate unsubstantiated allegation by CM C.B. Naidu that the Tirupati Tirumala Temple Prasadam were adulterated with meat of animals and other rotten items creating chaos amongst bhaktas," he wrote in a post on X.
CM Naidu has alleged that several procedures to procure ghee by the TTD were altered under Jagan Mohan Reddy government. ghee adulteration substandard animal fat show_cause_notice alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India Tirupati laddu fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat alleged use of animal fat in Tirupati laddus Tirupati laddus fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat used substandard ingredients and animal fat in Tirupati laddus Tirupati laddus fflo:hasAdulterant substandard ingredients used substandard ingredients and animal fat in Tirupati laddus Tirupati laddu adulteration fflo:identifies animal fat alleged use of animal fat in Tirupati laddus Tirupati laddu adulteration fflo:inRegion Tirupati Tirupati laddu row ghee sample failure at TTD prov:wasAttributedTo A R Dairy Food Private Ltd sample from your firm M/s. A R Dairy Food Private Ltd has failed to meet the parameters show cause notice to A R Dairy Food Private Ltd fflo:targets ghee suppliers of ghee to TTD analysis of ghee samples fso:isPerformedAt NDDB CALF Lab sent all the samples supplied to TTD for testing to NDDB CALF Lab at Anand analysis of ghee samples fso:isPerformedOn ghee sample from A R Dairy Food Private Ltd sample from your firm M/s. A R Dairy Food Private Ltd has failed to meet the parameters Food Safety and Standards (Food Products Standards and Food Additives) Regulation, 2011 fflo:appliesToFood ghee contravention of the provisions of the Food Safety and Standards (Food Products Standards and Food Additives) Regulation, 2011 Uttar Pradesh prasadam sample collection fflo:inRegion Uttar Pradesh In Uttar Pradesh, the Food Safety and Drug Administration (FSDA) has collected 13 samples of 'prasadam'17d:T15b0,Food safety authority issues show-cause notice to firm on contamination in Tirupati laddus thehindu.com The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), the government’s food regulatory authority under the Health Ministry, has issued a show-cause notice to A.R. Dairy, one of the companies which supplied ghee to the Tirupati temple in Andhra Pradesh, for allegedly providing substandard product to the temple.
Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) had reportedly got samples of its laddu prasadam tested and allegedly they did not meet the set standards and were found “adulterated” with palm oil and animal fat, including fish oil, beef tallow.
The issue came to light after Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N. Chandrababu Naidu alleged on September 18 that the previous Y. S. Jagan Mohan Reddy-led government had used substandard ingredients and animal fat in Tirupati laddus. Mr. Naidu subsequently announced a Special Investigation Team to probe these claims.
“This action has been initiated after four samples from the company failed to meet the food standard parameters. Further action will be taken after response from the company,’’ said a senior Health Ministry official.
In its notice, the food regulator asked the A.R. Dairy Food Private Ltd why its central licence should not be suspended for contravention of the above said provisions of the Food Safety and Standards (Food Products Standards and Food Additives) Regulation, 2011.
According to the notice, the FSSAI said it received information from the Director of Institute of Preventive Medicine, Mangalagiri (Andhra Pradesh), that A.R. Dairy Food Private Ltd in Dindigul was one of the suppliers of ghee to TTD since the last four years.
Tested in Gujarat
Further, as per the information, the ghee procurement committee of TTD has sent all the samples supplied to TTD for testing to the NDDB CALF Lab at Anand, Gujarat.
“After analysis, the sample from your firm A.R. Dairy Food Private Ltd (FSSAI Central License number 10014042001610) has failed to meet the parameters and your firm has been blacklisted by EO, TTD,” the notice said.
“By virtue of the above non-conformance of the product “ghee” manufactured by your firm which is not meeting the standards, you have contravened the Food Safety and Standards Act 2006, Rules and Regulations made thereunder.
“In view of all the above states you are hereby directed to show cause as to why your central licence shall not be suspended for contravention of the above said provisions of the Food Safety and Standards (Food Products Standards and Food Additives) Regulation, 2011,” the notice said.
The regulator asked them to send a reply by September 23 failing which it said suitable action would be initiated as per the Food Safety and Standards Act 2006 and Regulations.
Earlier Union Health Minister J.P. Nadda said he had spoken to the Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister and sought a report on the Tirupati laddu issue.
Meanwhile, the A.R. Dairy came under scrutiny after a report by NDDB CALF, a private laboratory specialising in testing animal feed and dairy products, found that ghee samples used in the Tirupati laddus contained foreign fats.
“The requirement of the temple is 10 tonnes of ghee per day. We have supplied not even 0.1 per cent of the requirement,” A.R. Dairy said in a statement.
Published - September 23, 2024 08:18 pm IST ghee adulteration foreign fats show-cause notice alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India NDDB CALF Lab Analysis fso:isPerformedAt NDDB CALF Lab NDDB CALF Lab at Anand, Gujarat ghee samples contained foreign fats fflo:identifies foreign fats ghee samples used in the Tirupati laddus contained foreign fats ghee samples contained foreign fats prov:wasAttributedTo A.R. Dairy A.R. Dairy came under scrutiny after a report by NDDB CALF, a private laboratory specialising in testing animal feed and dairy products, found that ghee samples used in the Tirupati laddus contained foreign fats. Tirupati laddus fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat found adulterated with palm oil and animal fat Tirupati laddus fflo:hasAdulterant fish oil including fish oil Tirupati laddus fflo:hasAdulterant beef tallow adulterated with palm oil and animal fat, including fish oil, beef tallow palm oil fflo:foundIn laddu prasadam found "adulterated" with palm oil Tirupati laddus fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil found "adulterated" with palm oil and animal fat IncidentFinding: Ghee non-conformance at TTD fflo:foundAtStep TTD Supply Chain suppliers of ghee to TTD Ghee non-conformance finding fflo:producedBy NDDB CALF Lab analysis sent all the samples supplied to TTD for testing to the NDDB CALF Lab Ghee non-conformance finding fflo:triggeredAction License suspension inquiry asked the A.R. Dairy Food Private Ltd why its central licence should not be suspended Show-cause notice for license suspension fflo:issuedBy FSSAI the food regulator asked the A.R. Dairy Show-cause notice for license suspension fflo:citesFinding IncidentFinding: Ghee non-conformance at TTD contravention of the above said provisions show-cause notice to A.R. Dairy fflo:citesFinding ghee samples contained foreign fats found that ghee samples used in the Tirupati laddus contained foreign fats ghee samples contained foreign fats fflo:supportedBy report by NDDB CALF report by NDDB CALF, a private laboratory NDDB CALF fflo:hasDefinition private laboratory specialising in testing animal feed and dairy products NDDB CALF, a private laboratory specialising in testing animal feed and dairy products17e:Tf7c,Tirupati laddu row: FSSAI issues show cause notice to ghee supplier newindianexpress.com NEW DELHI: India’s food regulator has issued a show cause notice to a Tamil Nadu-based company, which supplied ghee to Tirupati Balaji temple for making laddoos after animal fat was detected in four of its samples, official sources said on Monday.
The show cause notice was issued by the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI). It has asked the company to respond by September 23 to the charges.
The show cause notice, assessed by this paper, mentions why action should not be initiated against the firm AR Diary, one of the four companies that were supplying ghee to the famed temple in Andhra Pradesh.
The company came under scrutiny after a report from a Gujarat-based laboratory found that ghee samples used in the Tirupati temple laddus contained palm oil, fish oil, beef tallow, and lard (pig fat).
Official sources said the company supplied four samples for testing. “All four failed the test and animal fat was detected,” they added.
The show cause notice issued by FSSAI, said, "After analysis, the sample from your firm M/s. A R Diary Food Private Ltd (FSSAI Central License number 10014042001610) has failed to meet the parameters and your firm has been blacklisted by EO, TTD (Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD)."
"By virtue of the above non-conformance of the product "Ghee" manufactured by your firm which is not meeting the standards, you have contravened the Food Safety and Standards Act 2006, Rules and Regulations made there under." The notice said.
"To show cause as to why, your Central License shall not be suspended for contravention of the above said provisions of the Food Safety and Standards (Food Products Standards and Food Additives) Regulation, 2011. The reply in this regard shall be sent by 23.09.2024 failing which suitable action will be initiated as per the Food Safety and Standards Act 2006 and Regulations made there under," the notice added.
Union Health Minister JP Nadda on Friday said he had spoken to Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu and sought a full report on the Tirupati laddoo controversy.
He said the centre would examine the matter and take suitable action.
The Chennai-based company has strongly denied the allegations of adulteration and has challenged the private laboratory's findings.
The laddoos are 'prasadam' offered to the deity at the famed temple. It is also provided to crores of devotees who throng the Lord Venkateswara Swamy temple in Andhra Pradesh. ghee adulteration show cause notice pending_test India, Tirupati ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil ghee samples used in the Tirupati temple laddus contained palm oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant fish oil ghee samples used in the Tirupati temple laddus contained palm oil, fish oil, beef tallow, and lard ghee fflo:hasAdulterant beef tallow ghee samples used in the Tirupati temple laddus contained palm oil, fish oil, beef tallow, and lard ghee fflo:hasAdulterant lard ghee samples used in the Tirupati temple laddus contained palm oil, fish oil, beef tallow, and lard show cause notice fflo:issuedBy FSSAI The show cause notice was issued by the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) show cause notice fflo:targets ghee issued a show cause notice to a Tamil Nadu-based company, which supplied ghee animal fat fflo:foundAt Distribution supplied ghee to Tirupati Balaji temple ghee adulteration finding fflo:identifies animal fat animal fat was detected in four of its samples ghee adulteration finding fflo:foundIn ghee animal fat was detected in four of its samples suspension of Central License fflo:issuedBy FSSAI why, your Central License shall not be suspended suspension of Central License fflo:targets ghee non-conformance of the product "Ghee" manufactured by your firm adulteration allegations prov:wasAttributedTo A R Diary Food Private Ltd company has strongly denied the allegations of adulteration17f:T153c,Caught in Tirupati laddu row, firm that supplied ghee: ‘Our samples first tested at national labs’ indianexpress.com Caught in Tirupati laddu row, firm that supplied ghee: ‘Our samples first tested at national labs’
Kannan, a quality control officer at the Dindigul-based AR Dairy Food, denied allegations of adulteration and said there were rigorous quality checks at the company. ‘The allegations are severely damaging our reputation,’ he said
A day after the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) initiated legal action against the Tamil Nadu-based AR Dairy Food Private Limited for allegedly supplying adulterated ghee to the Sri Venkateswara Temple, the company has questioned the report on which the decision was based.
In his comments to a Tamil news channel Friday, Kannan, a quality control officer at the Dindigul-based AR Dairy Food, called the allegations “unsubstantiated”. His comments came a day after TTD Executive Officer J Shyamala Rao announced that samples from AR Dairy’s ghee had been found “highly adulterated”.
“We have been operational since 1998, and this is the first time such accusations have been made against us,” Kannan said.
According to him, AR Dairy runs its own procurement centres and employs advanced technology to test up to 102 quality parameters of milk within 32 seconds. “If the milk fails any quality test, it is rejected immediately,” he said.
He also claimed that AR Dairy was approved to supply ghee to TTD, a four-member expert team from the temple administration visited their plant to assess their capacity and quality control measures.
“Our ghee samples are first tested in national laboratories before being dispatched to TTD. Upon arrival, TTD’s own food safety officer checks the samples again,” Kannan said.
According to Kannan, AR Dairy holds ISO certification and follows strict quality protocols. None of the previous reports indicated any deviation in quality, he said, calling for a more transparent process of sample collection, such as recording a video to ensure accountability.
“These allegations, ranging from vegetable oil to animal fat adulteration, are severely damaging to our business. Moreover, the claim that fish oil was added is absurd; fish oil is more expensive than ghee. Any adulteration of this kind would immediately be detectable by smell alone,” Kannan said, adding that the company contributes to a “very small volume” of the total ghee used for TTD’s laddu production.
“We take immense pride in supplying ghee to TTD. For us, it’s not just business; it’s a blessing and honour,” he told the Tamil news channel.
The comments come a day after TTD’s Officer J Shyamala Rao said at a press conference that samples of ghee supplied by A.R. Dairy had been sent for testing following complaints about the declining quality of laddus, a popular temple offering, or ‘prasadam’.
“Out of 10 tankers of ghee provided by AR Dairy, four were found to be highly adulterated,” Rao said.
These remarks came days after Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N. Chandrababu Naidu alleged at an NDA legislative party meeting that the previous YS Jagan Mohan Reddy-led government had allowed the use of animal fat and fish oil in the preparation of laddus.
When contacted, Dr. Sathish Kumar, the designated officer for the Food Safety Department in Chennai, refused to comment on the particulars of the case. However, he said there are standard protocols under the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) for detecting food adulteration that are followed across the country.
“In Tamil Nadu, we adhere to the FSSAI guidelines strictly. When adulteration is suspected, we collect multiple samples from the same batch, with the presence of witnesses and the officials, and send them to a lab for testing. If the results show contamination, the supplier or the shop owner is notified and has 30 days to appeal,” Kumar said.
Asked about the possible use of animal fat or fish oil being used in ghee, Kumar said that both would be highly detectable through smell and taste. “If animal fat or fish oil were added, people unaccustomed to these substances would notice immediately. The smell of fish oil, in particular, is impossible to disguise,” he said. ghee adulteration testing pending_test India, Tirupati standard protocols for detecting food adulteration lkif:created_by FSSAI standard protocols under the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) for detecting food adulteration fish oil fflo:detectedBy smell The smell of fish oil, in particular, is impossible to disguise AR Dairy Food Private Limited fflo:foundAt Dindigul Dindigul-based AR Dairy Food ghee adulteration allegation fflo:inRegion Tirupati Caught in Tirupati laddu row AR Dairy Food fflo:compliesWith ISO certification AR Dairy holds ISO certification ghee fflo:inputTo laddu production total ghee used for TTD's laddu production ghee adulteration finding fflo:foundIn ghee four were found to be highly adulterated ghee adulteration finding fflo:foundAtStep Distribution Out of 10 tankers of ghee provided by AR Dairy Food Safety Department in Chennai fflo:compliesWith FSSAI guidelines In Tamil Nadu, we adhere to the FSSAI guidelines strictly animal fat fflo:detectedBy smell both would be highly detectable through smell and taste fish oil fflo:detectedBy taste both would be highly detectable through smell and taste180:T138a,Naidu's Tirupati Laddu Claim Under The Scanner As TTD Says Adulterated Ghee That Arrived In July Never Used: Report swarajyamag.com Amid the ongoing controversy surrounding alleged use of animal fat in Tirupati laddus, the Tirumala Tirupati Deasthanams (TTD), the trusts that manages the temple, has reportedly denied that adulterated ghee that arrived in July was used to prepare the laddus.
Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister Chandra had on Wednesday (18 September) claimed that animal fat was used to make Tirupati laddus under the previous Jagan Mohan Reddy-led government.
The Andhra CM's claim over Tirupati laddus sparked a massive row.
According to a report in The Print, when asked about whether the batches found to be adulterated were actually used for the preparation of the venerated prasadam at the Tirupati temple, the executive officer of the TTD categorically said, “No."
Naidu claimed that under the Yuvajana Sramika Rythu Congress Party (YSRCP) government, the Tirupati laddus were made with substandard ingredients, including the alleged use of animal fat instead of pure ghee.
Naidu has reportedly said that the sentiments of millions of devotees have been hurt on discovering the truth of how the laddus were being prepared before his government came to power in June
"However, according to Syamala, who took over as the executive officer of the trust days after the Naidu-led alliance formed the government on 12 June, the ghee said to be contaminated with fish oil, lard and beef tallow, besides other elements like vegetable oils, was supplied in July," The Print report said.
Out of 10 ghee tankers supplied by Tamil Nadu's AR Dairy, four were found to be of inferior quality based on human sensory perception of TTD experts.
Samples from these four tankers, two of which arrived on 6 July and the others on 12 July, were sent to the National Dairy Development Board’s Centre for Analysis and Learning in Livestock and Food (NDDB CALF) in Anand, Gujarat for adulteration testing.
“That ghee was never used, 100 percent,” Syamala was quoted as saying by ThePrint Saturday.
The adulterated ghee from the four tankers was set aside and returned to AR Dairy after the NDDB CALF report, which confirmed both animal and vegetable fat contamination.
According to Syamala, of the five agencies supplying ghee to TTD at that time, only the samples collected from AR Dairy tankers were found to be of abnormally low quality.
In a press conference held at Tirumala on Friday, Syamala had said that the samples were sent to external labs for testing for the “first time in history of TTD”.
YSRCP leaders, led by former Chief Minister Jagan Mohan Reddy, are now challenging Naidu’s allegations.
Speaking to the media on Friday, Jagan highlighted that Naidu was in power when the adulterated ghee was supplied and samples were collected and tested.
Jagan dismissed Naidu’s claims, stating, “Unfortunately, the CM is making a controversy from a rejected stock’s test report".
I Y R Krishna Rao, former chief secretary during Naidu’s previous tenure, was quoted by The Print as saying, “If the CM’s claims are based on the rejected lot following the NDDB report, then his allegations of animal fat in Tirupati laddus are unfounded.”
“Unless the government or the TTD have some other solid evidence to support the astonishing charges on YSRCP… If not, the issue might even boomerang on Naidu and TDP,” Krishna, who has previously served as TTD's executive officer, said.
Krishna added that Naidu’s allegations seemed like someone wantonly mixed the said animal fat in the ghee in order to hurt Hindu sentiments.
"I find the claims hard to believe. Is there a proof?” questioned Krishna.
“The sensitive issue should have been handled very delicately, but was used politically,” the retired administrator said.
Also Read: Major Infiltration Bid Thwarted Along International Border In Jammu, Weapons Recovered ghee adulteration fish oil lard beef tallow vegetable oils returned to supplier alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India animal fat fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee alleged use of animal fat instead of pure ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant fish oil ghee said to be contaminated with fish oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant lard ghee said to be contaminated with fish oil, lard and beef tallow ghee fflo:hasAdulterant beef tallow ghee said to be contaminated with fish oil, lard and beef tallow ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable oils the ghee said to be contaminated with fish oil, lard and beef tallow, besides other elements like vegetable oils inferior quality ghee finding fflo:producedBy human sensory perception found to be of inferior quality based on human sensory perception ghee adulteration finding fflo:supportedBy NDDB CALF report NDDB CALF report, which confirmed both animal and vegetable fat contamination ghee adulteration finding fflo:supportedBy NDDB CALF report NDDB CALF report, which confirmed both animal and vegetable fat contamination181:T17b6,Could Tirupati’s problems help clarify the history of ghee adulteration? indiatimes.com In November 1886, The Times of India reported a case at the Fort Police Court, of Poonamchand Dueera charged with selling adulterated ghee. He was an odd defendant. When his advocate Mr Hurryshunker asked if good ghee ever contained animal fat, Dueera responded that ghee was an animal fat since it came from milk.
He had to repeat the question before Dueera clarified that good ghee never came from dead animals. Hurryshunker suggested that the ghee he was selling was meant for lamps, not human consumption. Dueera said “I have never seen it used in lamps.”
When his advocate asked how long ghee stayed good, presumably hoping to establish it as perishable, Dueera said he had seen good twoyear-old ghee in Afghanistan. When asked if he knew about degrees of purity in clarified butter (ghee), Dueera’s response was almost philosophical: “I should say a thing was clarified when it is clarified.” (He lost his case and was fined ₹50.)Tirupati’s ghee drama reminds us that all too often, very little is clarified with ghee. There is a long history of adulterating it, both with fats rendered from dead animals and with vegetable fats, which can be natural like kokum butter or manufactured like vanaspati. The fact that vanaspati, made from vegetable oils solidified through the hydrogenation process, successfully sold itself as ‘vegetable ghee’ is another source of confusion, since ghee is considered vegetarian, though, as Dueera noted, it is technically an animal fat.
It is easy to get bogged down in the social, religious and medical claims for ghee, so perhaps it’s best to focus on its physical properties. In Harold McGee’s magisterial On Food and Cooking, he explains that butter (which can be made from fresh cream or cultured yoghurt, another complication) is first heated to 90°C to evaporate water and then to 120°C “to brown the milk solids, which flavours the ghee and generates antioxidant compounds that delay to onset of rancidity”. As Dueera admitted, properly made ghee stays good for a long time.
Removing its water makes it solid, or semi-solid, and this is the factor, along with great taste and keeping qualities, that make it so useful for sweets like ladoos. Liquid oils make softer products, but ghee holds together till the moment a piece is crumbled off and then melts in your mouth. This is why it is adulterated with other fats that are also solid at room temperature: Rendered animal fats like tallow (from beef) or lard (from pork) or vegetable fats like kokum butter, stearin (from palm oil) or vanaspati.
The basic problem, however, as writers like Harish Damodaran point out, is not enough butter. The White Revolution increased milk supply, but also increased demand for milk products. It makes more economic sense for dairy companies to supply butter, or products using butter fat, like ice cream, directly to consumers, rather than a bulk shipment of ghee, at lower negotiated rates, to a customer like Tirupati. As supplies fall short, there will always be the risk of them being made up from dubious sources.During the Raj, this often included rendered animal fats, which the British ate themselves, so were slow to see it as a problem. In 1887, ToI reported a debate in the Bombay Town Council where it was noted that the law only protected against adulteration that made ghee unhealthy, not against it being mixed with other edible fats. The law was finally changed, but this ambiguity lingered, which helped vanaspati. In 1927, a brand named Veejem advertised that it was better than ghee, because the latter was easily adulterated with animal fats.
Vanaspati ultimately fell out of favour because of problems caused by hydrogenation, but is back now with a new interesterification process and with added vegan appeal. Perhaps Tirupati could consider providing cheaper and clearly identified ‘ahimsak ladoos’ made with vanaspati, along with real ghee ladoos for those who can afford them.
Top Comment
{{{short}}} {{#more}} {{{long}}}... Read More {{/more}}
{{/totalcount}} {{^totalcount}}Start a Conversation
Disclaimer
Views expressed above are the author's own. ghee adulteration Fine of ₹50 alleged India Selling adulterated ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith Poonamchand Dueera Poonamchand Dueera charged with selling adulterated ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant fats rendered from dead animals adulterating it, both with fats rendered from dead animals ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable fats adulterating it, both with fats rendered from dead animals and with vegetable fats ghee fflo:hasAdulterant kokum butter vegetable fats, which can be natural like kokum butter ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vanaspati manufactured like vanaspati vanaspati fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee vanaspati, made from vegetable oils solidified through the hydrogenation process, successfully sold itself as 'vegetable ghee' ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod Substitution with animal fat adulterating it, both with fats rendered from dead animals ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod Substitution with vegetable fat adulterating it... with vegetable fats Poonamchand Dueera charged with selling adulterated ghee fflo:triggeredAction Fine of ₹50 He lost his case and was fined ₹50 ghee fflo:hasAdulterant tallow adulterated with other fats that are also solid at room temperature: Rendered animal fats like tallow ghee fflo:hasAdulterant lard adulterated with other fats that are also solid at room temperature: Rendered animal fats like tallow (from beef) or lard (from pork) ghee fflo:hasAdulterant kokum butter vegetable fats like kokum butter ghee fflo:hasAdulterant stearin stearin (from palm oil) ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vanaspati or vanaspati tallow fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee adulterated with other fats that are also solid at room temperature: Rendered animal fats like tallow ghee fflo:hasAdulterant rendered animal fats adulterated with animal fats vanaspati fflo:hasAdulterationMethod hydrogenation problems caused by hydrogenation182:Tb36,Andhra: MLAs Ganta and Vishnu raise concern over quality of Simhachalam temple ghee newindianexpress.com VISAKHAPATNAM: In the wake of widespread scrutiny following allegations of adulteration in cow ghee used in the preparation of Tirumala Laddus, Bheemili TDP MLA Ganta Srinivas Rao and Visakhapatnam North Constituency BJP MLA P Vishnu Kumar Raju inspected the Sri Varaha Lakshmi Narasimha Swamy temple in Visakhapatnam on Saturday.
In a press note released by Division-III Food Safety Officer GV Apparao on Saturday, it was stated that under the orders of MLA Ganta Srinivas Rao, an inspection was carried out at the Simhachalam Devasthanam food store on September 21. “The inspection focused on the ghee used in the preparation of offerings for devotees. Suspected adulteration was detected in ghee supplied by Rythu Dairy in Jangareddygudem, Eluru district, with traces of Vanaspati, flower oil, palm oil, and colour. Samples of the ghee, along with Toor Dal and gram flour used for laddu preparation, were collected for analysis and sent to the State Food Laboratory. A total of 945 kilograms (63 tins) of ghee was seized during the inspection. Further action will be taken based on the report from the Food Safety Laboratory,” the release noted.
MLA Vishnu Kumar Raju expressed his concerns during the inspection, stating, “I have visited Simhachalam Devasthanam on Saturday and enquired about the ghee supply. They are buying ghee at around Rs 340 due to the L1 rule, despite knowing it is not possible to supply pure ghee at that rate. We demand a CB-CID inquiry into the entire issue.” ghee adulteration Vanaspati flower oil palm oil inspection seizure suspected Visakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant Vanaspati Suspected adulteration was detected in ghee supplied by Rythu Dairy in Jangareddygudem, Eluru district, with traces of Vanaspati ghee fflo:hasAdulterant flower oil Suspected adulteration was detected in ghee supplied by Rythu Dairy in Jangareddygudem, Eluru district, with traces of Vanaspati, flower oil, palm oil, and colour. ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil Suspected adulteration was detected in ghee supplied by Rythu Dairy in Jangareddygudem, Eluru district, with traces of Vanaspati, flower oil, palm oil, and colour. Suspected adulteration in ghee supplied by Rythu Dairy prov:wasAttributedTo Rythu Dairy Suspected adulteration was detected in ghee supplied by Rythu Dairy cow ghee fflo:hasAdulterant colour Suspected adulteration was detected in ghee supplied by Rythu Dairy in Jangareddygudem, Eluru district, with traces of Vanaspati, flower oil, palm oil, and colour ghee adulteration finding fflo:foundIn cow ghee Suspected adulteration was detected in ghee ghee adulteration finding fflo:foundAtStep Simhachalam Devasthanam food store inspection was carried out at the Simhachalam Devasthanam food store183:Tfe2,Bhumana terms CM's claims over adulterated ghee with animal fats as baseless, demands CBI probe | Amaravati News - The Times of India indiatimes.com TIRUPATI: Former 
Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams chairman Bhumana Karunakar Reddy termed Chief minister Nara Chandrababu Naidu's claims over the use of adulterated ghee with animal fats in the preparation of the highly revered Tirupati Laddus as baseless and atrocious and demanded a CBI probe into these allegations which has hurt the sentiments of millions of devotees of Lord Venkateswara at every nook and corner of the world.
Speaking to reporters in Tirupati on Sunday, Bhumana accused the CM of trying to malign the sacred abode of Lord Venkateswara Swamy and His divine prasadams by making baseless accusations against the YSRCP as part of his political gameplan.
Recalling that more than 1000 indigenous desi cows from Gujarat, Rajasthan and other parts of the country were brought and sheltered at the Goshala to launch the Navaneetha seva at Tirumala during the YSRCP regime with an aim to ensure the best quality milk and ghee are procured from the TTD Goshala and utilizes for the religious rituals held at the Tirumala temple on a daily basis, Bhumana reiterated that the successive TTD trust boards appointed by the then Chief minister YS Jagan Mohan Reddy always strived to preserve the sanctity of the ancient Tirumala temple by all means.
The former TTD chairman clarified that the Tirupati trust has an in-house laboratory where all necessary tests are carried out to check the quality of ghee as per the tender protocols. And in such instances when substandard ghee supplies were received, they were rejected and sent back as per the quality protocols. 
"When TTD has stringent mechanisms in place to prevent the supply of adulterated raw materials at every stage, how can the Chief minister make such a baseless accusation on the previous govt", Bhumana questioned.
The former chairman also wondered how the TTD EO J Syamala Rao could alter his statement over lab reports in such a highly sensitive issue concerning the sentiments of millions of devotees across the globe. 
"During his press first press conference held in July, TTD EO stated that ghee stocks were found adulterated with vegetable oils and that the contractor was blacklisted and his supplies were returned. And now EO is echoing the remarks of the Chief minister and stating that the ghee stocks supplied by AR dairy foods was adulterated with animal fats", Bhumana underlined.
Accusing the ruling TDP of playing fire with religious matters and people's faith, the former TTD chairman demanded a CBI probe or a judicial probe into the adulteration of ghee with animal fats allegations levelled by the CM against the previous YSRCP regime. ghee adulteration vegetable oils animal fats CBI probe demanded contractor blacklisted alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable oils ghee stocks were found adulterated with vegetable oils ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fats ghee stocks supplied by AR dairy foods was adulterated with animal fats ghee adulterated with animal fats prov:wasAttributedTo AR dairy foods ghee stocks supplied by AR dairy foods was adulterated with animal fats ghee adulterated with vegetable oils prov:wasAttributedTo contractor ghee stocks were found adulterated with vegetable oils and that the contractor was blacklisted Tirupati Laddus fkg:hasIngredient ghee preparation of the highly revered Tirupati Laddus ghee quality test fso:isPerformedAt TTD in-house laboratory TTD trust has an in-house laboratory where all necessary tests are carried out to check the quality of ghee ghee stocks were found adulterated with vegetable oils prov:wasAttributedTo TTD EO J Syamala Rao TTD EO stated that ghee stocks were found adulterated with vegetable oils ghee adulterated with animal fats prov:wasAttributedTo TTD EO J Syamala Rao EO is echoing the remarks of the Chief minister and stating that the ghee stocks supplied by AR dairy foods was adulterated with animal fats184:T13a4,Tirupati Laddu ghee supplier's defense: ‘Fish oil expensive’ hindustantimes.com Tirupati Laddu ghee supplier's defense: ‘Fish oil expensive’
Tirumala Laddu row: A day after the TTD initiated legal action against the firm, the employee refuted the allegation that fish oil was used to prepare ghee.
Tirupati Laddu row: An employee of AR Dairy Food Private Limited – a Tamil Nadu-based company in the dock for allegedly supplying adulterated ghee to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams for Sri Venkateswara Temple prasadam – has called the allegations against the firm “absurd”.
A day after the TTD initiated legal action against the firm, the employee refuted the allegation that fish oil was used to prepare ghee. He said the charge was absurd because fish oil was more expensive than ghee.
Kanan, a quality control officer of the firm, said any adulteration of this kind would be immediately detectable by smell.
“These allegations, ranging from vegetable oil to animal fat adulteration, are severely damaging to our business. Moreover, the claim that fish oil was added is absurd; fish oil is more expensive than ghee. Any adulteration of this kind would immediately be detectable by smell alone,” he told a Tamil channel, according to The Indian Express.
The officer said the company has been producing ghee since 1998. He said the milk procured for ghee undergoes 102 quality checks.
He said the company's ghee was approved by TTD.
“Our ghee samples are first tested in national laboratories before being dispatched to TTD. Upon arrival, TTD’s food safety officer checks the samples again,” he added.
Meanwhile, spiritual guru Sri Sri Ravi Shankar said in a post on Sunday that the row has inflicted a deep wound in the Hindu psyche.
“The Tirupati laddu row has inflicted a deep wound and rage in the Hindu psyche. It is high time that temple management is overseen by, and handed over to, religious leaders and devotees, rather than self-serving officials, ruthless business people and politicians,” he wrote on X.
TTD executive officer J Shyamala Rao said last week that lab tests revealed the presence of animal fat and lard in chosen samples of the ghee supplied by the company.
Andhra minister Nara Lokesh said on Saturday that the government will not spare those involved in using animal fats in Tirupati laddus.
"NDDB's report is clear that adulteration happened. The report is clear, this is not an allegation. Chandrababu Naidu spoke with facts. We will not spare anyone and we will also not leave this issue with just a CBI inquiry," he said.
With inputs from PTI, ANI
- Follow the latest breaking news, major developments and agenda-setting stories from India and around the world with the newsdesk at Hindustan Times. Operating round the clock, the desk brings together experienced editors, reporters and correspondents to deliver fast, accurate and contextual reporting across subjects that influence public policy, governance, business, society and international affairs. The HT News Desk covers politics, elections, government policies, the economy, business and markets, science and technology, the environment, law and order, infrastructure, education, climate issues and geopolitics, while closely tracking developments across states, institutions and global capitals. The team also leads coverage of major breaking news events, policy announcements, court proceedings, natural disasters, public emergencies and significant international developments. Reports published by the newsdesk are based on information gathered from reporters on the ground, official statements, government agencies, court records, regulatory filings, recognised institutions and other authoritative sources. Stories undergo editorial scrutiny and verification processes to ensure accuracy, fairness and relevance, and are updated as events evolve and additional information becomes available. Whether covering a key political decision in New Delhi, an economic policy shift affecting millions, a landmark court ruling or a major global event, the HT News Desk aims to provide readers with reliable, fact-based journalism that delivers not only the latest developments but also the context and analysis needed to understand their wider implications.Read More ghee adulteration animal fat legal action alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat lab tests revealed the presence of animal fat and lard in chosen samples of the ghee SensoryTest fflo:producesIndicator smell detectable by smell alone legal action against AR Dairy Food Private Limited fflo:issuedBy TTD TTD initiated legal action against the firm ghee fflo:hasAdulterant lard lab tests revealed the presence of animal fat and lard ghee adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith AR Dairy Food Private Limited lab tests revealed the presence of animal fat and lard in chosen samples of the ghee supplied by the company animal fat fflo:detectedBy LaboratoryTest lab tests revealed the presence of animal fat185:T2d91,'Animal fat' in Tirupati laddus: Who supplied ghee to Balaji temple and why did Nandini opt out? Who said what? hindustantimes.com 'Animal fat' in Tirupati laddus: Who supplied ghee to Balaji temple and why did Nandini opt out? Who said what?
Tirupati laddus row: Health minister JP Nadda sought a report on the matter from Andhra Pradesh government and promised suitable action after examining it.
Tirupati laddus row news: The controversy over Tirupati laddus or laddoos has snowballed into a massive political slugfest, with the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams, which manages the famous Sri Venkateswara Swamy Temple, backing chief minister N Chandrababu Naidu's claim that the famous ‘prasadam’ had animal fat and YS Jagan Mohan Reddy of the YSRCP dubbing the accusations as “atrocious”.
As the controversy over the Tirupati laddus intensified, the Centre stepped in on Friday, with Union health minister JP Nadda seeking a report on the matter from the Andhra Pradesh government and promising suitable action after examining it. Food minister Pralhad Joshi called for an investigation into the allegations.
Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams said
Addressing a press conference in Tirupati on Friday, TTD executive officer J Shyamala Rao claimed that lab tests had revealed the presence of animal fat, 'Lard' (pig fat) and other impurities and the board was in the process of blacklisting the contractor who supplied 'adulterated' ghee.
Also Read | Tirupati Laddus row: ‘Never supplied ghee to Tirupati temple,’ says Amul
The TTD's statement comes a day after the ruling Telugu Desam Party or TDP circulated a lab report to back N Chandrababu Naidu's allegation that animal fat was used in Tirupati laddus during the previous YSRCP government.
Now, the legal process will start, Shyamala Rao said and noted that the suppliers took advantage of a lack of an in-house testing facility.
“Now the reason for the lack of quality is not having an in-house lab, sending the samples to outside labs for testing and unviable rates,” Rao said.
Also Read | Rahul Gandhi reacts to alleged use of ‘animal fat’ in Tirupati Laddu: ‘This issue will…’
He highlighted that the suppliers took advantage of these deficiencies, who supplied ghee between ₹320 and ₹411 and called this price band as unviable for supplying pure cow ghee.
"Even after warning, four ghee tankers sent by AR Foods were prima facie found to be of substandard quality. The S-value analysis carried out on the sample sent to the reputed NDDB CALF, Anand (lab), fell outside the standard limits, suggesting the presence of foreign fats such as soya bean, sunflower, palm kernel fat or even lard and beef tallow," said Rao.
Further, he noted that these samples also indicated the presence of vegetable oil contamination.
What TDP claimed on Tirupati laddus
TDP spokesperson Anam Venkata Ramana Reddy at a press conference on Thursday claimed that the adulteration has been confirmed by a Gujarat-based livestock laboratory, on the ghee samples provided by the TTD.
Reddy displayed the purported lab report which apparently confirmed the presence of "beef tallow", “Lard” and “Fish Oil” in the given ghee sample. The sample receipt date was July 9, 2024 and the lab report was dated July 16.
What did Chandrababu Naidu say on Tirupati laddus?
Addressing a public meeting in Prakasam district, CM Chandrababu Naidu alleged the previous regime bought inferior quality ghee at cheaper prices affecting the quality of Laddu and damaged the sacredness of Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams.
"Today we have changed the ghee supplier. We started purchasing Nandini brand ghee from Karnataka. People are saying their sentiments were hurt (following allegations of adulterated ghee and presence of animal fat in Tirupati laddus). When the sentiments were hurt, should I spare them (culprits) when unpardonable mistakes were committed," Chandrababu Naidu asked, asserting people have faith in their respective religions.
YS Jagan Mohan Reddy hits back
Former CM and YSRCP president Jagan Mohan Reddy described the matter as "diversion politics", and slammed it as a “concocted story”.
Reddy said the adulteration issue was taken up to divert the public attention from the state government's 100 days of rule and alleged that Naidu is such a person who would use God also for political gains.
“This is diversion politics. On the one hand, people are expressing their anger at Chandrababu Naidu's 100 days' rule. They are demanding what happened to their 'Super six' (poll promises). Under these circumstances, in order to divert the public attention, this concocted story,” Reddy claimed.
“Is it fair to play with the sentiments of crores of devotees across the world,” Reddy asked CM Naidu.
Reddy added that all samples, tests and results mentioned in lab test reports as evidence occurred under the NDA government.
Jagan Mohan Reddy to write to CJI Chandrachud, PM Modi
Reddy also said he will write to Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Chief Justice of India (CJI) DY Chandrachud over Naidu's alleged undermining conduct towards the Tirumala deity.
What Tirupati ghee supplier AR Dairy Food Pvt Ltd said
The Tamil Nadu-based AR Dairy Food Private Limited, a company that supplied ghee to Tirupati Lord Balaji temple, said its product samples have been duly cleared by authorities certifying its quality.
The Dindigul-based firm said only during June and July did it supply ghee to the Tirumala temple. Even when it was supplied, it was sent along with duly accredited lab reports.
Never supplied ghee to Tirupati temple: Amul
Amul issued a clarification on Friday stating that it had never supplied ghee to Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam (TTD).
After posts on various social media platforms, Amul.coop posted a statement on X, stating that Amul Ghee was never supplied to the TTD.
"This is in reference to some social media posts mentioning that Amul Ghee was being supplied to Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam (TTD). We wish to inform that we have never supplied Amul Ghee to TTD," the statement read.
"We also wish to clarify Amul Ghee is made from milk at our state-of-the-art production facilities, which are ISO certified. Amul Ghee is made from high-quality pure milk fat. The milk received at our dairies passes through stringent quality checks, including adulteration detection as specified by FSSAI," it added.
Why was Nandini ghee supply to Tirupati temple was halted last year?
Karnataka Muzrai minister Ramalinga Reddy announced on Friday that all prasada offered at major temples in the state will be tested. He added that only Nandini ghee supplied by the Karnataka Milk Federation (KMF) will be used in making the prasada at these temples.
"A circular will be issued today or tomorrow to all major temples in Karnataka mandating the use of only KMF's Nandini ghee in prasada. We will also test the prasada given at these temples," Reddy said.
In 2023, the KMF reportedly opted out of a tender for supplying ghee to TTD. The KMF said it was selling ghee at ₹400 per kilogram and couldn't match the lower prices offered by other companies to the TTD, News18 reported.
The federation, at that time, maintained that it was unwilling to compromise on quality and that reducing prices would result in loss to it and it has to serve the interest of farmers.
However, the KMF began supplying Nandini ghee to Tirupati within the past month following chief minister Chandrababu Naidu’s directive to improve the quality of laddus.
Sharp reaction from Lord Venkateswara temple's ex-priest
Former chief priest of Lord Venkateswara temple, Ramana Deekshitulu expressed anguish over reports of adulteration in the ingredients used for making the sacred 'laddu prasadam.'
He claimed he had taken the quality-related deficiencies to the notice of the executive officer and TTD board chairman but in vain. He urged CM Naidu to take corrective measures to address the situation.
(With inputs from agencies)
- Follow the latest breaking news, major developments and agenda-setting stories from India and around the world with the newsdesk at Hindustan Times. Operating round the clock, the desk brings together experienced editors, reporters and correspondents to deliver fast, accurate and contextual reporting across subjects that influence public policy, governance, business, society and international affairs. The HT News Desk covers politics, elections, government policies, the economy, business and markets, science and technology, the environment, law and order, infrastructure, education, climate issues and geopolitics, while closely tracking developments across states, institutions and global capitals. The team also leads coverage of major breaking news events, policy announcements, court proceedings, natural disasters, public emergencies and significant international developments. Reports published by the newsdesk are based on information gathered from reporters on the ground, official statements, government agencies, court records, regulatory filings, recognised institutions and other authoritative sources. Stories undergo editorial scrutiny and verification processes to ensure accuracy, fairness and relevance, and are updated as events evolve and additional information becomes available. Whether covering a key political decision in New Delhi, an economic policy shift affecting millions, a landmark court ruling or a major global event, the HT News Desk aims to provide readers with reliable, fact-based journalism that delivers not only the latest developments but also the context and analysis needed to understand their wider implications.Read More ghee adulteration blacklisting pending_test India, Tirupati Tirupati laddu fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat allegation that animal fat was used in Tirupati laddus S-value analysis fso:isPerformedAt NDDB CALF, Anand S-value analysis carried out on the sample sent to the reputed NDDB CALF, Anand Amul Ghee fkg:hasIngredient milk fat Amul Ghee is made from high-quality pure milk fat circular mandating use of only KMF's Nandini ghee fflo:targets Nandini ghee mandating the use of only KMF's Nandini ghee in prasada Tirupati laddus fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat lab tests had revealed the presence of animal fat Tirupati laddus fflo:hasAdulterant Lard presence of animal fat, 'Lard' (pig fat) Lard fflo:hasDefinition pig fat 'Lard' (pig fat) ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat contractor who supplied 'adulterated' ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant Lard contractor who supplied 'adulterated' ghee Tirupati laddus fflo:hasAdulterant impurities presence of animal fat, 'Lard' (pig fat) and other impurities Tirupati laddu fflo:hasAdulterant beef tallow suggesting the presence of foreign fats such as ... beef tallow Tirupati laddu fflo:hasAdulterant soya bean fat suggesting the presence of foreign fats such as soya bean ghee fflo:hasAdulterant beef tallow confirmed the presence of "beef tallow" ghee fflo:hasAdulterant Lard confirmed the presence of "beef tallow", "Lard" and "Fish Oil" ghee fflo:hasAdulterant Fish Oil confirmed the presence of "beef tallow", "Lard" and "Fish Oil" in the given ghee sample Tirupati laddu fflo:hasIngredient ghee ghee samples provided by the TTD ghee fflo:compliesWith FSSAI adulteration detection as specified by FSSAI Amul Ghee fflo:compliesWith FSSAI adulteration detection as specified by FSSAI AR Dairy Food Private Limited fflo:foundAt Dindigul The Dindigul-based firm AR Dairy Food Private Limited fflo:foundAt Tamil Nadu The Tamil Nadu-based AR Dairy Food Private Limited Karnataka Milk Federation fflo:compliesWith quality standards unwilling to compromise on quality186:T99c,Tirupati Laddu Row: Never Supplied Ghee to TTD, says Amul deccanchronicle.com Dairy giant Amul on Friday clarified that they have never supplied ghee to Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam (TTD) for the preparation of laddu.
In a statement, Amul said, “This is in reference to some social media posts mentioning that Amul Ghee was being supplied to Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam(TTD). We wish to inform that we have never supplied Amul Ghee to TTD.”
Amul further clarified that the milk in their diaries goes through stringent quality checks. ”We also wish to clarify Amul Ghee is made from Milk at our state-of-the-art production facilities which are ISO certified. Amul Ghee is made from high quality pure milk fat. The milk received at our dairies passes through stringent quality checks including adulteration detection as specified by FSSAI.”
The statement was issued to counter what Amul described as a “misinformation campaign.”
Amul further clarified that the milk in their diaries goes through stringent quality checks. ”We also wish to clarify Amul Ghee is made from Milk at our state-of-the-art production facilities which are ISO certified. Amul Ghee is made from high quality pure milk fat. The milk received at our dairies passes through stringent quality checks including adulteration detection as specified by FSSAI.”
The statement was issued to counter what Amul described as a “misinformation campaign.”
On Wednesday, Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu sparked a controversy by alleging that animal fat was used in place of ghee for preparation of the Tirumala laddu prasadam during the YSRC rule of the state.
The opposition YSR Congress on Friday has moved the Andhra Pradesh High Court seeking a probe into the allegations of Chandrababu Naidu that adulterated ghee was recently used for laddu at TTD.
( Source : Deccan Chronicle )
Next Story ghee adulteration animal fat court_inquiry alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India Amul Ghee fkg:hasIngredient Milk Amul Ghee is made from Milk Amul Ghee fkg:hasIngredient pure milk fat Amul Ghee is made from high quality pure milk fat animal fat fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee alleging that animal fat was used in place of ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat alleging that animal fat was used in place of ghee animal fat fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee animal fat was used in place of ghee Amul fflo:compliesWith FSSAI adulteration detection as specified by FSSAI187:T56e,CBI probe sought into adulterated ghee issue thehansindia.com Vijayawada: Bharatiya Chaitanya Yuvajana Party (BCY) president Ramachandra Yadav sharply reacting to the allegations of adulterated ghee in the preparation of Tirupati Prasadam laddu demanded thorough investigation into the issue and arrest of the culprits in 48 hours.
If the government did not take action, they would launch a massive agitation across the State, he warned. He demanded action against the accused whoever they may be even if it was Jagan Mohan Reddy and put them behind bars.   
There is a clear cut case of conspiracy in the issue as all the systems were destroyed in Tirumala in the last five years. He said the Nandini ghee was of good quality but the previous government chose to purchase low quality ghee at cheaper price.   
Ramachandra Yadav wrote letters to the State and the Central governments on the issue. In a letter to Union Home Minister Amit Shah, he demanded investigation by the CBI and arrest the culprits.  
He also demanded action against the then executive officer and the TTD Board members.  
He also wrote a letter to TTD Executive Officer Syamla Rao seeking action. ghee Tirupati Prasadam laddu adulteration ghee investigation_sought alleged Vijayawada, Andhra Pradesh, India Tirupati Prasadam laddu fkg:hasIngredient ghee adulterated ghee in the preparation of Tirupati Prasadam laddu188:Tc09,FDA seize suspected adulterated food items worth  ₹ 14.35 lakh hindustantimes.com FDA seize suspected adulterated food items worth ₹ 14.35 lakh
FDA Pune seized ₹14.35 lakh worth of suspected adulterated food during the Ganesh Festival, conducting inspections across multiple districts for public safety.
As part of its special drive during the Ganesh Festival, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Pune seized samples of suspected adulterated and substandard food items worth ₹ 14.35 lakh, the officials said.
The drive was conducted in Pune, Solapur, Satara, Sangli and Kolhapur districts. During the special drive Food Business Operators (FBO) and food items were checked for adulteration, hygiene and absolute implementation of food safety norms, the officials said.
“In Pune district, 48 inspections of food establishments were conducted. A total of 53 food samples, including milk, khoya, paneer, mawa, ghee, butter, and namkeen, were collected for analysis. Besides, the FDA seized adulterated ghee, butter, sweet khoya, and vanaspati ghee worth ₹5,16,438,” a senior FDA official said.
Suresh Annapure, joint commissioner (Food), FDA, Pune division, said the drive was carried out in the interest of public health and safety for effective implementation of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006, and the regulations of 2011.’
‘During the Ganesh festival, the FDA conducted a significant operation in Pune district and region. A total stock worth ₹14,35,958 was seized, including ₹5,16,438 in Pune district and ₹9,19,520 in Pune division,’ the FDA said in a statement released on Friday.
Annapure said that samples of the suspected food items are sent to the laboratory for analysis and the reports are awaited.
“The action will be taken as per the provision of the law if the suspected food items are found adulterated, substandard or unsafe for consumption. If required the food licenses of the FBO can be also suspended or cancelled in case of gross violation as per the rules,” he added.
Further action will be taken once the analysis reports are available. The FDA has urged citizens to report suspected food adulteration by contacting the Food Administration’s toll-free number 1800222365. ghee vanaspati ghee adulteration substandard seizure suspected Pune, Maharashtra, India laboratory analysis fso:isPerformedOn samples of the suspected food items samples of the suspected food items are sent to the laboratory for analysis Ganesh Festival Special Drive fflo:inRegion Satara The drive was conducted in Pune, Solapur, Satara, Sangli and Kolhapur districts Ganesh Festival Special Drive fflo:inRegion Sangli The drive was conducted in Pune, Solapur, Satara, Sangli and Kolhapur districts khoya fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy 53 food samples, including milk, khoya, paneer, mawa, ghee, butter, and namkeen paneer fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy 53 food samples, including milk, khoya, paneer, mawa, ghee, butter, and namkeen ghee fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy 53 food samples, including milk, khoya, paneer, mawa, ghee, butter, and namkeen189:T463,Laddu Prasadam: Action sought against firms which supplied adulterated ghee thehansindia.com Guntur: BJP State secretary Nagothu Ramesh Naidu said use of  adulterated ghee for making Tirumala laddu prasadam hurt the sentiments of the devotees.
Addressing the media at BJP district office in Guntur city on Friday, he alleged that this was a conspiracy of Chirstian missionaries.   
He demanded action against the companies which supplied adulterated ghee. He alleged that former Chief Minister Y S Jagan Mohan Reddy never respected the sentiments of the Hindus and cheated them.  
He demanded the State government to remove the employees belonging to other religions from TTD. BJP district president Vanama Narendra was also present.   
In a separate statement, Kisan Morcha State vice-president V Panduranga Vithal demanded action against the responsible persons for using adulterated ghee in Tirumala laddu prasadam. ghee laddu prasadam adulteration adulterated ghee action sought alleged Guntur, Andhra Pradesh, India laddu prasadam fflo:hasAdulterant adulterated ghee adulterated ghee for making Tirumala laddu prasadam18a:Tfb4,TTD blacklists supplier of adulterated ghee, warns of criminal action thehindu.com The Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) Executive Officer, J. Shyamala Rao, on Friday (September 20, 2024) categorically said that the Tamil Nadu-based AR Dairy Food Private Limited, a key supplier of ghee to the temple, had been blacklisted after being found to be supplying highly adulterated ghee, and criminal proceedings would follow if the company failed to provide a satisfactory explanation in response to the show cause notice issued.
Addressing a press conference, which saw the attendance of several national media reporters, Mr. Rao said among the five suppliers contracted to provide ghee, only AR Dairy’s product was found to contain dangerously high levels of foreign fat (fish oil, beef tallow (rendered form of beef suet) and lard (fat drawn from the abdomens of pigs) together were called foreign fat, as per the lab report). “The purity levels were very low,” he said, revealing that the ‘S’ value of the ghee, a key indicator of quality, was 19.72, which was far below the required standard of 98.68 to 104.32. The findings confirmed the ghee was far from fit for use in prasadams, he said.
The TTD sent the ghee samples to the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) in Gujarat for testing after complaints of poor laddu quality poured in and four out of 10 tankers from AR Dairy were found to be highly adulterated, forcing the TTD to reject the shipments, he said.
Low price
“Not having own adulteration laboratory or not sending the ghee samples to outside labs for quality testing’‘ were the main reasons for compromise on the quality of ghee. “The supplier took advantage of this lack of quality check to supply bad quality ghee,’‘ he said.
“Another important factor was the low rate of ₹320 per kg agreed to by the supplier. This itself raises suspicion on the quality of ghee being supplied,” he observed.
The tender for this company was finalised on May 8, 2024 and supply started from May 15, he said.
To avoid recurrence of such incidents, the TTD decided to take drastic corrective measures. Plans were afoot to set up an in-house sensory laboratory with the assistance of NDDB and get the staff trained by the Mysore-based Central Food Technology Institute (CFTRI), the EO said.
Expert committee
The NDDB offered to install a ghee adulteration testing lab at a cost of ₹75 lakh by December. The TTD already formed an expert committee to oversee the purchase of raw materials, especially those used in the preparation of prasadams, he said.
In a further crack down, he confirmed the temporary suspension of the purchase of all organic ingredients with the findings confirming them to be of substandard in nature.
“The TTD will not compromise on the use of pure cow ghee,” Mr. Rao asserted, underscoring the temple’s commitment to safeguarding the sanctity of the world-famous laddu prasadams to which devotees across the globe attach great reverence.
Published - September 20, 2024 10:24 pm IST ghee adulteration blacklist recall_triggered India, Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) ghee fflo:hasAdulterant beef tallow foreign fat (fish oil, beef tallow (rendered form of beef suet) ghee fflo:hasAdulterant lard lard (fat drawn from the abdomens of pigs) foreign fat fflo:foundIn ghee AR Dairy's product was found to contain dangerously high levels of foreign fat ghee fflo:hasPermissibleLimit S value standard for ghee required standard of 98.68 to 104.32 Adulteration of ghee in AR Dairy tankers fflo:foundAtStep Distribution four out of 10 tankers from AR Dairy were found to be highly adulterated ghee adulteration method fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional supplier took advantage of this lack of quality check to supply bad quality ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant adulterant four out of 10 tankers from AR Dairy were found to be highly adulterated NDDB prov:wasAssociatedWith ghee adulteration testing lab The NDDB offered to install a ghee adulteration testing lab18b:T904,Tirupati Prasad Controversy: TN Dairy Company Denies Its Ghee Was Impure freepressjournal.in Chennai: Amidst the row over animal fat including beef fat allegedly having been used in the ghee used in the preparation of laddu prasadam served to devotees in Tirupati temple, a dairy company in Tamil Nadu, which had supplied ghee, to Tirupati Tirumala Devasthanam, has denied the charge.
The authorities in Andhra Pradesh had alleged that A R Dairy based in Dindigul in south Tamil Nadu had not complied with the quality instructions and samples from the ghee supplied by it had confirmed the presence of animal fats.
However, on Friday, two representatives of the private dairy firm denied that the ghee supplied by them to the TTD was impure or substandard. “Even in June and July we had supplied ghee that was certified by FSSAI and AGMARK to the TTD. Their were no complaints at all,” one of the representatives said.
The company said it had supplied four truck loads of ghee during June and July to the TTD. “There were no issues,” the dairy firm’s representative told journalists but added, that the company had stopped supply thereafter. Standard Operating Procedure was followed and samples were tested by government recognised laboratory before the ghee was despatched.
The private firm said it has been in the business of dairy for the past 25 years and were supplying milk products to numerous institutions and there were no complaints about the quality.
In a related development, representatives of the Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board on Friday inspected the premises of A R Dairy and lifted samples of ghee as well as water discharged from the plant. The officials said they would get the ghee samples tested and based on the lab reports take further course of action. ghee adulteration animal fat inspection sample collection alleged Dindigul, Tamil Nadu, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat samples from the ghee supplied by it had confirmed the presence of animal fats ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fats samples from the ghee supplied by it had confirmed the presence of animal fats A R Dairy fflo:compliesWith AGMARK supplied ghee that was certified by FSSAI and AGMARK ghee sample fflo:collectedAt Processing lifted samples of ghee as well as water discharged from the plant18c:T1923,Amul clarifies it never supplied ghee to Tirupati Balaji amid animal fat row opindia.com Amid the controversy over the presence of animal fat like beef fat, pig fat and fish oil in ghee used to make the famous laddus of Tirupati temple, dairy giant Amul has clarified it never supplied ghee to the temple. The clarification came after several social media users claimed that after the temple stopped buying Nandini ghee from Karnataka over increased price, they started to buy Amul Ghee, and the adulteration was found in the ghee supplied by Amul.
Notably, Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams in Tirumala has been using Nandini ghee to make its prasadam for decades. But after the Karnataka Congress government increased the prices of Nandini Milk marketed by the Karnataka Milk Federation, the ghee price also increased, and it was no longer the lowest bidder in twice-a-year tenders floated by the temple. As a result, the temple committee selected a different ghee supplier to make the laddus.
Now, it has been revealed that the cheaper ghee selected by the temple was not pure dairy ghee, but it was adulterated with plant and animal fats. As per a test report by According to a report by the National Dairy Development Board’s “Centre of Analysis and Learning in Livestock and Food” (CALF) laboratory in Gujarat, apart from several vegetable oils, the ghee used by the temple also had Fish Oil, Beef tallow which is a form of fat, and Lard which is a form of fart obtained from pigs.
The laddus also used vegetarian ingredients like Soybean, Sunflower, Olive, Rapseed, Linseed, Wheat germ, Maize germ, Cotton Seed, Coconut, Palm kernel fat, and Palm Oil.
After this revelation, some supporters of opposition parties started to claim that this adulterated ghee was supplied by Amul.
So they changed the ghee from Karnataka's Nandini to Gujarat's Amul because it was "cheaper". Such a farce.https://t.co/cbc5HlI6qD
— Dr. J (@just1doctorwala) September 20, 2024
Social media users also cited an India Today report from August last year, which claimed that Amul ghee was selected instead of Nandini ghee after the price hike by Karnataka Milk Federation products. However, strangely, the Amul ghee words were put in brackets in the quote by KMF president K Bheema Naik. The India Today report quoted him lamenting about losing the contract to supply to the temple as saying, “We proposed a higher price due to the upcoming hike in milk costs from August 1, but the TTD chose a different company (Amul brand) that made the lowest bid on the e-procurement site.”
It is not sure whether Naik mentioned Amul, or it was inserted by India Today, as the term is in brackets. The report also raised the question whether the quality of the laddu will be same after it is made using Amul ghee.
Pro-Congress Twitter account Spirit of Congress also shared the report, claiming that Nandini was removed and Amul was given the contract to supply ghee to TTD in 2023.
Nandini used to supply pure quality Ghee till 2023 for Tirumal Tirupati Devasthanam.(TTD)
— Spirit of Congress✋ (@SpiritOfCongres) September 20, 2024
Then.. Nandini was removed and Amul was given the contract to supply ghee to TTD.
This article is from 2023.. ?#TirupatiLaddu pic.twitter.com/dp82yvbgh9
Mumbai Congress social media general secretary also made the same claim, that Amul had replaced Nandini to supply ghee.
So Nandini Ghee from Karnataka was replaced, and Amul Ghee from Gujarat was awarded the contract for Tirupati Prasad. Something seems suspicious ever since the news broke yesterday. Tirupati is one of those revered temples where such mistakes are unimaginable. #TirumalaLaddu… pic.twitter.com/J1dcG07fyS
— Vidya (@Vidyaraj51) September 20, 2024
Now, Amul has clarified that it never supplied ghee to TTD, and the claims made social media users are wrong. In a statement, the company said, “This is in reference to some social media posts mentioning that Amul Ghee was being supplied to Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam (TTD). We wish to inform that we have never supplied Amul Ghee to TTD.”
Issued in Public Interest by Amul pic.twitter.com/j7uobwDtJI
— Amul.coop (@Amul_Coop) September 20, 2024
The further added, “We also wish to clarify Amul Ghee is made from Milk at our state-of-the-art production facilities which are ISO certified. Amul Ghee is made from high quality pure milk fat. The milk received at our dairies passes through stringent quality checks including adulteration detection as specified by FSSAI.”
The leading dairy brand said, “This post is being issued to stop this misinformation campaign against Amul.” ghee adulteration fish oil beef tallow vegetable oils alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant Fish Oil ghee used by the temple also had Fish Oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant Beef tallow ghee used by the temple also had Fish Oil, Beef tallow ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable oils apart from several vegetable oils, the ghee used by the temple also had ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod adulteration with plant and animal fats cheaper ghee selected by the temple was not pure dairy ghee, but it was adulterated with plant and animal fats laddu fkg:hasIngredient Soybean The laddus also used vegetarian ingredients like Soybean laddu fkg:hasIngredient Sunflower The laddus also used vegetarian ingredients like Soybean, Sunflower Amul Ghee fkg:hasIngredient Milk Amul Ghee is made from Milk Amul Ghee fkg:hasIngredient pure milk fat Amul Ghee is made from high quality pure milk fat ghee fflo:hasAdulterant Lard ghee used by the temple also had ... Lard which is a form of fart obtained from pigs Beef tallow fflo:hasDefinition a form of fat Beef tallow which is a form of fat laddu fkg:hasIngredient Linseed The laddus also used vegetarian ingredients like ... Linseed laddu fkg:hasIngredient Wheat germ The laddus also used vegetarian ingredients like ... Wheat germ laddu fkg:hasIngredient Maize germ The laddus also used vegetarian ingredients like ... Maize germ laddu fkg:hasIngredient Cotton Seed The laddus also used vegetarian ingredients like ... Cotton Seed laddu fkg:hasIngredient Coconut The laddus also used vegetarian ingredients like ... Coconut laddu fkg:hasIngredient Palm kernel fat The laddus also used vegetarian ingredients like ... Palm kernel fat Amul fflo:compliesWith FSSAI adulteration detection standards adulteration detection as specified by FSSAI18d:T14ae,Tirupati laddu row: Ghee supplier to Tirumala denies &#8216;beef tallow&#8217; adulteration claim financialexpress.com Animal fat row: As the controversy over the claim that animal fat was being used for the preparation of Tirupati laddus snowballed, A R Dairy Food Private Limited, which supplied ghee to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) to prepare prasadam, has denied allegations of adulteration.
The Dindigul-based company, in the eye of the storm, has said that it is one of the many suppliers of ghee to TTD.
“First of all, the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) lab test report does not say that the ghee sample was from A R Diary. The report also mentions that there is a possibility of false positive results. TTD accepted the tankers of ghee we provided this June and July only after test reports were to their satisfaction. We stopped supplying after July as TTD changed the vendors. There are a number of reasons why traces of foreign fat may be found in ghee, including cow feed,” the head of quality control department at A R Dairy Food told The Indian Express.
“That ghee sample cannot be from A R Dairy Food Private Limited, that is our stand,” she added, IE reported.
Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams reacts
This comes after TTD executive officer J Shamala Rao claimed that the four ghee samples sent to NDDB were from A R Dairy Food, and had arrived in four tankers on July 6 and July 12 this year.
He also told the media, “The report says the ghee sample is adulterated with vegetable fat and also animal fat. Animal fat adulteration includes lard (pig fat), palm oil, beef tallow, and fish oil including grape seed and linseed. The ghee sample was a concoction of all this and the result was abnormally low. Pure milk fat should have a reading between 95.68 to 104.32, but all our ghee samples had values around 20, which means the ghee supplied is highly adulterated… We started the procedure for blacklisting and also penalising the supplier. We formed an expert committee to improve ghee supplies and also to strengthen our internal system so that we don’t face this problem again… We have found suppliers who have passed the tests… We have been asked by the expert committee to set up our own lab… This problem will be solved in the future.”
JP Nadda seeks report
Health Minister JP Nadda on Friday spoke to Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu and sought a report in connection with the alleged use of animal fat and other sub-standard ingredients in the making of famous Tirupati laddoos.
JP Nadda said, “I spoke to Andhra Pradesh CM N Chandrababu Naidu after getting information about this and took details from him. I have asked him to share the available report so that I can examine it. I will also speak to the state regulators and investigate this. Suitable action will be taken as per the food safety standards. As of now, I have asked for the report and we will examine it.”
What is the row about?
A massive controversy broke out earlier this week after Andhra CM N Chandrababu Naidu claimed that animal fat and other sub-standard ingredients were used for making Tirupati laddus during the previous YS Jagan Mohan Reddy-led government.
Later, the Telugu Desam Party (TDP) presented a lab report from Gujarat-based NDDB CALF Ltd which confirmed the presence of “beef tallow,” “lard” (pig fat), and fish oil in the ghee samples used for making the laddus.
At a press conference, TDP spokesperson Anam Venkata Ramana Reddy displayed the purported lab report which showed that the ghee samples tested had been received by CALF (Centre for Analysis and Learning in Livestock & Food) on July 9, 2024, and the report was dated July 16, 2024.
The report’s findings have intensified the debate over the authenticity of the ingredients used in the preparation of the famous sweet. ghee adulteration vegetable fat animal fat blacklisting and penalising the supplier formation of expert committee alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable fat ghee sample is adulterated with vegetable fat ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat The report says the ghee sample is adulterated with vegetable fat and also animal fat. pure milk fat limit fflo:hasValue 95.68 to 104.32 Pure milk fat should have a reading between 95.68 to 104.32 Tirupati laddu fkg:hasIngredient ghee preparation of Tirupati laddus lard fflo:hasDefinition pig fat Animal fat adulteration includes lard (pig fat) ghee fflo:hasPermissibleLimit pure milk fat limit Pure milk fat should have a reading between 95.68 to 104.32 ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod concoction of fats The ghee sample was a concoction of all this Tirupati laddu fflo:hasAdulterant beef tallow confirmed the presence of beef tallow Tirupati laddu fflo:hasAdulterant fish oil confirmed the presence of beef tallow, lard, and fish oil in the ghee samples ghee fflo:hasAdulterant lard confirmed the presence of beef tallow, lard (pig fat), and fish oil in the ghee samples ghee fflo:hasAdulterant fish oil confirmed the presence of fish oil in the ghee samples lard fflo:hasDefinition pig fat lard (pig fat) CALF fflo:hasDefinition Centre for Analysis and Learning in Livestock & Food CALF (Centre for Analysis and Learning in Livestock & Food)18e:T69a,Dindigul Dairy Firm Refutes Charge It Supplied Adulterated Ghee To Ttd | Madurai News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Madurai: A R Dairy Food Pvt Ltd, a Dindigul-based dairy company, has refuted the charge that it supplied adulterated ghee to Thirumala Tirupati Devasthanam following allegations that the ghee used to make Tirupati laddoo contained animal fat.
Company's officials told reporters in Dindigul on Friday that the ghee supplied by them was duly tested before despatch and subsequently tested by TTD too. They have sent all test reports to TTD after the row erupted, said the company's quality control officials Leni and Kannan. 
They supplied ghee to TTD in June and July and had stopped the supply after that. "The test report on Tirupati laddoo does not mention our company name anywhere," they said adding that the ghee manufactured by them is available in markets.
Meanwhile, sources in the food safety department said they conducted tests in the company after complaints arose in July about substandard ghee. They found that the products satisfied all parameters of food safety standards, said the officials. In the wake of the laddoo row, national food safety officials would probe the complaint further, they said.
"The contribution of A R Dairy in the ghee supplied to TTD is merely 0.1% of ghee procured by TTD and we sent just four tankers of it. Food safety officials and AGMARK officials have also inspected our products and found no anomalies," said Leni. ghee adulteration animal fat inspection probe alleged Dindigul, Tamil Nadu, India products fflo:compliesWith food safety standards found that the products satisfied all parameters of food safety standards18f:Td58,Tirupati laddu row: CM Chandrababu Naidu accuses YSRCP of compromising sacredness of laddus with &#8216;adulterated&#8217; ghee financialexpress.com TDP supremo and Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu on Friday launched a scathing attack on the YSRCP, accusing its previous government of compromising the sacredness of the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) by procuring cheap, “adulterated” ghee to prepare the famous laddu sweet.
Naidu warned to take action against those responsible for the alleged adulteration of ghee used in the laddu sweet offering at Tirupati’s Tirumala Temple during the YSRCP’s previous government, led by YS Jagan Mohan Reddy, PTI reported.
He stated that people’s sentiments were hurt due to this “unpardonable mistake” and hinted that he would not spare those who committed it.
At a public meeting in Prakasam district, TDP supremo N Chandrababu Naidu accused the previous YSRCP government of compromising the quality of the sacred Laddu sweet offering at the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams, which runs the popular Sri Venkateswara Swamy temple in Tirupati, by buying inferior quality ghee at cheaper prices.
“Today we have changed the ghee supplier. We started purchasing Nandini brand ghee from Karnataka. People are saying their sentiments were hurt (following allegations of adulterated ghee and presence of animal fat in Tirupati laddus). When the sentiments were hurt, should I spare them (culprits) when unpardonable mistakes were committed,” Naidu asked, asserting people have faith in their respective religions.
Karnataka govt mandates use of Nandini ghee in temples
Meanwhile, in the wake of the escalating Tirupati Laddu controversy, the Karnataka government on Friday issued a circular directing all temples under the Hindu Religious Institutions and Charitable Endowments Department to uphold quality standards in ‘prasada’ preparations.
The circular mandates that only Nandini brand ghee from the Karnataka Milk Federation (KMF) be used in temple activities.
“It is hereby instructed that at all notified temples that come under the Karnataka State Religious Endowment Department to only use Nandini ghee compulsorily for ‘sevas’ (services), lamps, preparation of all kinds of prasadas, and at ‘Dasoha Bhavans’ (where food is served),” the circular said.
On Friday, the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) reported finding ‘lard’ (pig fat) and other impurities in ghee, based on a lab report. TTD Executive Officer J Shyamala Rao confirmed that tests revealed the presence of animal fat and lard in selected samples. As a result, the board is moving to blacklist the contractor responsible for supplying the ‘adulterated’ ghee.
With PTI Inputs ghee adulteration animal fat blacklisting of contractor alleged Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat allegations of adulterated ghee and presence of animal fat buying inferior quality ghee at cheaper prices fflo:hasFraudType Substitution buying inferior quality ghee at cheaper prices TTD finding of lard in ghee fflo:producedBy lab report based on a lab report TTD finding of lard in ghee fflo:triggeredAction blacklisting of contractor board is moving to blacklist the contractor responsible Karnataka government circular fflo:appliesToFood ghee mandates that only Nandini brand ghee from the Karnataka Milk Federation be used190:T9b4,Major Crackdown: Over 1,000 kg Adulterated Ghee Seized, Sanchi To Lodge FIR freepressjournal.in Indore (Madhya Pradesh): In a significant move led by the Food Safety Administration Department, a joint team carried out a surprise inspection in the Malharganj area, leading to the seizure of 1,015 kg of counterfeit Sanchi Ghee. The fake ghee was kept by the trader who was expecting it to be sold at a price of more than Rs 6 lakh.
The action, initiated under the directions of collector Asheesh Singh, targeted Chhogalal Shyam Traders following credible information of fake ghee being sold. “Officials from the Sanchi Milk Union were called to the scene to verify the authenticity of the products. They confirmed that the 1 kg and 15 kg packs of Sanchi Ghee being sold were indeed counterfeit,” chief food safety officer Manish Swami said.
Meanwhile, the officials have collected a total of five samples, including that of Sanchi and Mewar Ghee, from the establishment, and 1015 kg of ghee was seized. The Sanchi Milk Union has also decided to file an FIR against the seller.
“Additionally, our team collected six more samples from two other establishments in the Malharganj area. In total, 11 samples have been sent to the State Food Testing Laboratory in Bhopal for further examination. Legal action will be based on the findings of the lab reports,” Swami added. Officials confirmed that similar actions will continue against the sale of fake and adulterated products. ghee adulteration counterfeit counterfeit ghee seizure FIR Filing alleged Indore, Madhya Pradesh, India Counterfeit Sanchi Ghee Incident fflo:foundIn ghee seizure of 1,015 kg of counterfeit Sanchi Ghee Counterfeit Sanchi Ghee Incident prov:wasAttributedTo Chhogalal Shyam Traders targeted Chhogalal Shyam Traders following credible information of fake ghee being sold Counterfeit Sanchi Ghee Incident fflo:foundAtStep Retail kept by the trader who was expecting it to be sold Counterfeit Sanchi Ghee Incident fflo:inRegion Madhya Pradesh Indore (Madhya Pradesh) Counterfeit Sanchi Ghee Incident fflo:triggeredAction FIR Filing Sanchi Milk Union has also decided to file an FIR against the seller State Food Testing Laboratory Analysis fso:isPerformedOn Ghee Samples 11 samples have been sent to the State Food Testing Laboratory in Bhopal for further examination State Food Testing Lab Analysis fso:isPerformedAt State Food Testing Laboratory in Bhopal sent to the State Food Testing Laboratory in Bhopal191:Ta8d,Poor quality oil found in kits distributed among tribes, fine of ₹7 lakh imposed on company thehindu.com The Idukki Subcollector has imposed a fine of ₹7 lakh on Star Foods, a private coconut oil brand, for distributing substandard coconut oil to tribal families in Idukki. The fine has been imposed on the company’s owner Shijas P.A., following an investigation by the Food Safety department in Thodupuzha.
The coconut oil brand named Kera Shathi was included in food kits distributed to tribal communities by the Scheduled Tribes Development department in June. Shortly afterwards, several cases of food poisoning were reported in the Velliyamattom panchayat tribal settlements near Thodupuzha. Upon receiving complaints, the food safety officer collected samples of the oil and sent them for chemical analysis.
Expired licence
During the investigation, it was revealed that the company’s Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) registration had expired on June 5, 2024. Furthermore, the FSSAI licence granted to Star Foods only permitted the sale of fish and fish products, making the production and sale of coconut oil a violation of the regulations.
In the hearing, Mr. Shijas admitted that the coconut oil was produced in Tamil Nadu and repackaged for sale, but the packets did not have an address, violating packaging norms. The Subcollector’s order emphasised that the sale of coconut oil with an expired licence and without proper labelling posed a serious threat to public health.
The order has mandated that the fine be paid within 15 days. If the payment is not made, the amount will be recovered through the revenue recovery process.
Published - September 05, 2024 07:32 pm IST coconut oil substandard mislabeling unsafe_food Fine of ₹7 lakh alleged Thodupuzha, Idukki, Kerala, India Food poisoning incident in Velliyamattom fflo:inRegion Velliyamattom panchayat cases of food poisoning were reported in the Velliyamattom panchayat Fine of ₹7 lakh on Star Foods fflo:issuedBy Idukki Subcollector The Idukki Subcollector has imposed a fine of ₹7 lakh on Star Foods Adulteration of coconut oil by Star Foods prov:used coconut oil distributing substandard coconut oil coconut oil repackaging act prov:wasAssociatedWith Mr. Shijas Mr. Shijas admitted that the coconut oil was produced in Tamil Nadu and repackaged coconut oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod repackaging without address packets did not have an address, violating packaging norms repackaging without address fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling packets did not have an address, violating packaging norms Subcollector's order fflo:targets coconut oil Subcollector's order emphasised that the sale of coconut oil192:T153a,FSSAI seizes 14000 litres of oil Kanpur festive season healthandme.com Credits: FSSAI and Canva
After Indore's Bhagirathpura food contamination and Horlicks adulteration in Odisha, another news of food adulteration comes from the state of Uttar Pradesh where UP Food Safety and Drug Administration or the UPFSDA with Food Safety and Standards Authority of India or FSSAI seized nearly 14,000 litres of adulterated oils during raids in Kanpur.
This has led to the confiscation of 1,000 kilograms of colored waste and other suspicious food items. This happened right ahead of the festive season like Holi, Eid and as Ramadan continues. This is also the time when festive meals are cooked in oil, ghee, and Ramadan fast is also broken with dates that too were found in rotten conditions.
Also Read: Scientists Develop First Antibodies To Block Epstein Barr Virus
As per the official statement, enforcement teams seized 13,972 litres of adulterated oil and 1,350 of colored waste during inspection across the city.
Officials were also able to spot fake ghee in the manufacturing unit of Kalyanpur. Fake ghee worth approximately Rs. 5.45 lakh were confiscated. The seized samples have been sent to a laboratory for further testing and analysis.
The raids were launched as a part of wider effort to curb food adulteration before the festive season when the demands for such edible also rise sharply.
Surprise inspections were also conducted at several food outlets, cold storage facilities and dairies across Kanpur that brought out a concerning image. These places have come under the scanner. Authorities inspected Swaroop Cold Storage in Aishbagh and Himalayan Cold Storage on Ayodhya Roads. Further raids were carried out on dairies in the Havetmau area and Rae Bareli Road. Samples from sweet shops and other eateiers have also been collected.
The raid collected rotten dates from the cold storage. Followings have been collected and recovered:
Officials confirmed that strict actions will be taken against them and this will continue throughout the festive period.
उत्तर प्रदेश में खाद्य सुरक्षा अभियान
— UPFSDA (@UPFSDA) February 26, 2026
होली से पहले बड़ी कार्रवाई खाद्य तेल इकाइयों पर विशेष प्रवर्तन कार्रवाई
खाद्य सुरक्षा एवं औषधि प्रशासन विभाग, उत्तर प्रदेश ने आमजनमानस को गुणवत्तापरक खाद्य तेल उपलब्ध कराने के उद्देश्य से एक बड़ा समन्वित निरीक्षण अभियान चलाया।
* 58… pic.twitter.com/uj3Ip5tpis
FSDA intensified raids and checks in Lucknow too during Ramadan and Holi. These inspections will be done in warehouses, food outlets, and dairy units to prevent sale of adulterated and substandard products. Raids from Hapur too have led to confiscation of adulterated food. UPFSDA plans to conduct further raids during the festive season. On X, formerly Twitter, the UPFSDA posted that it has seized 25,000 kg of Suji (valued at ₹10 Lakhs) from M/s Raj Sneh Agro Foods Pvt Ltd due to packaging regulation violations. Samples of Jaggery Powder, Gur, and Suji have been sent for lab testing.
Food adulteration happens when there is an intentional addition of foreign or inferior substance to original food products. A 2024 study published in SAGE Open Medicine notes various health impact of adulterated food which include:
The study also notes that adulteration could also lead to allergic reactions. Pregnant woman, children and elderly are more prone to getting any illness if adulterated food is consumed. edible oil adulteration seizure suspected Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India fake ghee fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee spot fake ghee in the manufacturing unit of Kalyanpur fake ghee fflo:foundAt manufacturing unit of Kalyanpur spot fake ghee in the manufacturing unit of Kalyanpur Rotten dates fflo:foundAt Cold storage The raid collected rotten dates from the cold storage Seizure of 25,000 kg of Suji fflo:issuedBy UPFSDA UPFSDA posted that it has seized 25,000 kg of Suji seizure of adulterated oils in Kanpur fflo:issuedBy UP Food Safety and Drug Administration UP Food Safety and Drug Administration or the UPFSDA with Food Safety and Standards Authority of India or FSSAI seized nearly 14,000 litres of adulterated oils seizure of adulterated oils in Kanpur fflo:issuedBy Food Safety and Standards Authority of India UP Food Safety and Drug Administration or the UPFSDA with Food Safety and Standards Authority of India or FSSAI seized nearly 14,000 litres of adulterated oils seizure of adulterated oils in Kanpur prov:used oil seized nearly 14,000 litres of adulterated oils Strict actions against violators fflo:issuedBy UPFSDA Officials confirmed that strict actions will be taken against them Lucknow raids fflo:issuedBy UPFSDA FSDA intensified raids and checks in Lucknow too Hapur raids fflo:issuedBy UPFSDA Raids from Hapur too have led to confiscation Seizure of Suji fflo:targets Suji seized 25,000 kg of Suji Seizure of Suji fflo:targets Suji seized 25,000 kg of Suji Adulterated food fflo:causesEffect Allergic reactions adulteration could also lead to allergic reactions193:Tbf7,Food Safety Officers Uncover Trend of Selling Fake Products | Jaipur News - Times of India indiatimes.com Jaipur: Food safety officers have unravelled a new trend in selling fake products. Those accused of selling fake food items are spending big bucks to create such products.
Authorities said they even get bar codes and batch numbers printed on fake products, making it difficult for consumers to distinguish between original and fake versions of the product.
The tape used to seal the counterfeit packages also bears the name of the original brand. âOne canât identify that it is a counterfeit product with the packing. The factory which we unearthed was producing adulterated desi ghee and using the packets which was almost the same of the original one,â said Pankaj Kumar Ojha, assistant commissioner, food safety and drug control, health department.
In response to this issue, Jaipur Diary, the producer of Saras Ghee, filed an FIR at Jaisinghpura Khor police station against the accused for producing and selling fake ghee in the market. The accused was manufacturing spurious ghee under various brand names, including Saras, Mahan, Krishna, and Lotus. Food safety officers have collected samples from the factory and sent them for testing.
âBased on the lab test report, the matter will be presented before the court against the accused,â said Ojha.
The officers revealed that the accused was sourcing packaging materials from Delhi. An official said that they were using edible oils, such as vegetable oil, to produce the ghee. The lab test will determine whether the ghee produced by them is safe for human consumption or not.
In June 2024, a team from the food safety commissionerate seized 450 litre of adulterated ghee during a raid at a retail mart in Malviya Nagar under the 'Shuddha Aahar-Adulteration Par Vaar Abhiyan' initiative. They found that the ghee was substandard, and there were multiple boxes of Saras Ghee with identical batch numbers and series. ghee adulteration counterfeit vegetable oil FIR filed seizure alleged Jaipur, Rajasthan, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable oil using edible oils, such as vegetable oil, to produce the ghee fake ghee production incident fflo:foundAtStep Processing The factory which we unearthed was producing adulterated desi ghee fake ghee production incident fflo:inRegion Jaipur Jaipur: Food safety officers have unravelled Ghee seizure at Malviya Nagar retail mart fflo:foundAtStep Retail seized 450 litre of adulterated ghee during a raid at a retail mart seizure of adulterated ghee fflo:inRegion Malviya Nagar seized 450 litre of adulterated ghee during a raid at a retail mart in Malviya Nagar ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod Substitution with vegetable oil using edible oils, such as vegetable oil, to produce the ghee Substitution with vegetable oil fflo:hasFraudType Substitution using edible oils, such as vegetable oil, to produce the ghee Mislabeling with identical batch numbers fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling multiple boxes of Saras Ghee with identical batch numbers and series194:T7da,FDA Raid on 21 Food Establishments in Kanpur indiatimes.com Kanpur: A team from Food Security and Drug Administration (FDA) department conducted a raid on Friday at M/s MA Enterprises in Dada Nagar, resulting in the seizure of the establishment due to the absence of a food license and the production of food items from expired raw materials under extremely unsanitary conditions.
Another team targeted M/s Tripathi Enterprises in Dada Nagar, collecting five samples of loose mustard oil.
They also confiscated 12 quintals of mustard oil, valued at Rs 67,200, on suspicion of adulteration.
FDA orchestrated a comprehensive raid on Friday, targeting approximately 21 food establishments. 
The operation culminated in the seizure of food items valued at Rs 1.56 lakhs and the collection of 34 food samples for further analysis.
According to Sanjay Pratap Singh, assistant commissioner (Food) - II of the FDA, a team raided the industrial site of M/s Universal Foods at Udyog Kunj, Panki, and confiscated 148 kgs of cumin worth Rs 74,000, 18 kgs of red chili powder worth Rs 2,520, 8 kgs of mixed spices worth Rs 1,120, and 156 kgs of garlic powder worth Rs 11,250.
Singh said the raids were conducted to ensure the sale of unadulterated food products during the Rakshabandhan festival, following the directives of the food commissioner and the DM. Additional teams collected as many as 34 food samples from 21 shops and seized edible items worth Rs 1.56 lakhs. The samples included milk and milk products, sweets, mawa, chili sauce, tomato sauce, gram powder, spices, and Boondi Ka Laddoo.
The collected samples will be sent to laboratories for examination, and the food establishments will face prosecution if the samples fail the lab testing, Singh added. mustard oil adulteration seizure sample_collection suspected Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India Raid on 21 Food Establishments fflo:issuedBy Food Security and Drug Administration team from Food Security and Drug Administration (FDA) department conducted a raid195:T8bb,129kg of spurious ghee seized in Vadodara | Vadodara News - Times of India indiatimes.com 129kg of spurious ghee seized
Vadodara: Food safety officials of the Vadodara Municipal Corporation (VMC) raided a private dairy in the Gotri area of the city on Friday night and seized 129kg of ghee that is suspected to be spurious. The action was based on a tip-off from a Gotri police officer. 
The officer had received intelligence about the trade of ghee of dubious quality at Bansidhar Dairy Farm in Gokul Township on Gotri Road.
The officer had also learned that a large stock of it was stored at the dairy. 
A team of food safety officers went to the dairy late on Friday night. They found that a large quantity of the substance was stored in large aluminium cans. Prima facie, it was apparent that the substance was not ghee. 
Samples were taken and sent to the public health laboratory of the civic body. A VMC official said the material may contain hydrogenated vegetable oil or similar ingredients. It was being sold loose in small quantities from the shop. âSuch incidents have emerged in the past as well and we have taken action,â the official said. ghee adulteration hydrogenated vegetable oil seizure raid suspected Vadodara, Gujarat, India ghee adulteration at Bansidhar Dairy Farm prov:wasAssociatedWith Bansidhar Dairy Farm trade of ghee of dubious quality at Bansidhar Dairy Farm ghee adulteration at Bansidhar Dairy Farm prov:used ghee trade of ghee of dubious quality ghee fflo:hasAdulterant hydrogenated vegetable oil material may contain hydrogenated vegetable oil hydrogenated vegetable oil fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee material may contain hydrogenated vegetable oil or similar ingredients hydrogenated vegetable oil fflo:foundAt Bansidhar Dairy Farm material may contain hydrogenated vegetable oil or similar ingredients seizure of spurious ghee at Bansidhar Dairy Farm fflo:foundAtStep Retail sold loose in small quantities from the shop analysis of ghee sample fso:isPerformedOn ghee sample from Bansidhar Dairy Farm Samples were taken and sent to the public health laboratory analysis of ghee sample fso:isPerformedAt public health laboratory of the civic body sent to the public health laboratory of the civic body196:T61d,AMC seizes 180kg of âedible oilâ, seals 5 units indiatimes.com Ahmedabad: A team of the civic body’s health department seized 180 kilograms of edible oil of various brands and sealed five establishments selling substandard food items between July 14 and Saturday.
The health department has sealed five units including an oil godown in Sarkhej, City Point Restaurant in Gomtipur, Pooja Grih Udyog in Chandkheda, Jamalpur’s Haroon Fry Center, and Super Gold in Bapunagar. 
AMC teams inspected 1,164 establishments, issuing notices to 417 of them. A total of 993kg of inedible food and 807 litres of inedible liquid food were destroyed. 
During this period, 220 food samples were collected and sent to the food laboratory for testing. Four food samples were found to be substandard. These include a paneer sample from Shahibaug Dhokla Hub Snacks Restaurant, a tomato puree sample from Sindhu Bhavan SMSR Hospitality, a malai paneer sample from Maninagar Horizon Foods, and a chavanprash sample from Behrampura Shiv Shakti Chavana Mart. tnn edible oil substandard seizure sealing suspected Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India Seizure of 180kg edible oil fflo:issuedBy Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation AMC seizes 180kg of 'edible oil' Substandard edible oil finding fflo:foundAtStep Retail sealed five establishments selling substandard food items Paneer substandard finding fflo:foundIn paneer paneer sample from Shahibaug Dhokla Hub Snacks Restaurant Tomato puree substandard finding fflo:foundIn tomato puree tomato puree sample from Sindhu Bhavan SMSR Hospitality197:Tdce,TTD blacklists contractor for supplying substandard ghee | Amaravati News - The Times of India indiatimes.com TIRUPATI: Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams has blacklisted a contractor for supplying substandard ghee to the Tirupati trust.
TTD's action comes as a stern warning to all the suppliers of various ingredients involved in the preparation of the world renowned Tirupati laddus.
Speaking to reporters at Tirumala on Tuesday, TTD executive officer J Syamala Rao reiterated the temple trust's resolve in restoring the quality, taste and aroma of the Tirupati laddus through a series of stringent measures.
"We have constituted a high level committee comprising of dairy farming experts and scientists. They are conducting a study into all the mechanisms involved and will also identify the gaps which has led to the decline in the quality of laddus over the last few years. This committee is expected to submit its report within a week and we shall implement the committee's recommendations in totality to improve the overall quality of the Laddu prasadams", Syamala Rao asserted.
Explaining to reporters that top quality cow ghee was the most crucial ingredient which eventually helps in enhancing the overall quality of the Laddu prasadams, TTD EO noted that two tankers of ghee were returned after lab tests confirmed that the ghee supplied to the TTD was adulterated with vegetable oils. 
"We have blacklisted the supplier and have returned back his ghee stocks. We have also warned other suppliers to strictly adhere to the tender guidelines and commit themselves to supplying the best quality cow ghee. While some of them have obliged, others haven't and we will be constrained to take action against them as well", Syamala Rao warned.
TTD EO also added that a state of the art FSSAI lab will also be soon set up at Tirumala in order to facilitate the testing of various ingredients used in the preparation of prasadams. 
"Right now in the absence of such a facility, we are constrained to send the materials for lab testing to outside and this is a major bottleneck that we are contemplating to overcome by establishing our own testing lab at Tirumala", Syamala Rao reaffirmed. ghee adulteration vegetable oils blacklisting lab_confirmed Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable oils ghee supplied to the TTD was adulterated with vegetable oils adulteration of ghee with vegetable oils fflo:identifies vegetable oils lab tests confirmed that the ghee supplied to the TTD was adulterated with vegetable oils adulteration of ghee with vegetable oils fflo:foundIn ghee lab tests confirmed that the ghee supplied to the TTD was adulterated with vegetable oils vegetable oils fflo:detectedBy lab tests lab tests confirmed that the ghee supplied to the TTD was adulterated with vegetable oils testing of various ingredients fso:isPerformedAt FSSAI lab state of the art FSSAI lab will also be soon set up at Tirumala in order to facilitate the testing of various ingredients blacklisting of contractor fflo:targets ghee blacklisted a contractor for supplying substandard ghee vegetable oils fflo:isSubstituteFor cow ghee ghee supplied to the TTD was adulterated with vegetable oils blacklisting of supplier fflo:issuedBy Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams We have blacklisted the supplier blacklisting of supplier fflo:targets cow ghee blacklisted the supplier and have returned back his ghee stocks warning to suppliers fflo:issuedBy Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams We have also warned other suppliers198:T56b,Raid Conducted on Fast Food Centers and Hotels for Using Adulterated Oils thehansindia.com In a surprise inspection carried out by the Municipal Commissioner and Food Safety Officers, several fast food centers and hotels under Badwel Municipality were found to be using adulterated oils and tasting salt, posing a serious threat to public health.  
The raids were conducted in response to information received by the authorities about the use of harmful ingredients in the food prepared at these establishments. Banned plastic covered spoons were also seized during the inspection.  
The Municipal Commissioner issued a warning to the fast food centers and hotels, cautioning them against using food colors or oils that could potentially harm the health of consumers. Strict action will be taken against any offenders found using such harmful ingredients.  
The authorities have urged the public to be cautious and to report any suspected cases of food adulteration or unsafe practices in eateries to ensure public health and safety. adulterated oils adulteration warning suspected Badwel, India warning to the fast food centers and hotels fflo:issuedBy Municipal Commissioner Municipal Commissioner issued a warning to the fast food centers and hotels adulterated oils fflo:causesEffect serious threat to public health using adulterated oils ... posing a serious threat to public health199:T69e,FSSAI issues notices to 55 edible oil manufacturers | Ahmedabad News - Times of India indiatimes.com Ahmedabad: FSSAI Gujarat issued notices to 55 edible oil manufacturers, restraining them from using old tins. These 55 include almost all refiners and re-packers. 
Sources said the Gujarat food and drug control administration (FDCA) and 
FSSAI have asked manufacturers to only use new tins for edible oils, but many are still reusing tins. 
FSSAI notice states, âIn the interest of food safety and to prevent potential hazards from metal contact with food, it has come to our attention that many food business operators (FBOs) involved in the manufacturing, re-labelling, repackaging, trading or any other food handling activities (specifically edible oil) continue to use old tin containers for packaging purposes.
As stipulated in the Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulation of 2018, tin containers once used, shall not be re-used for packaging of food.â H G Koshia, commissioner of the Gujarat FDCA, said, âAccording to the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India, the reuse of container tins for packaging food is prohibited.â edible oil contamination prohibited_additive reused tin containers Notice to 55 edible oil manufacturers suspected Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India Notice to 55 edible oil manufacturers fflo:issuedBy FSSAI Gujarat FSSAI Gujarat issued notices to 55 edible oil manufacturers Notice to 55 edible oil manufacturers fflo:targets edible oil notices to 55 edible oil manufacturers Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulation of 2018 fflo:defines Prohibition on reusing tin containers tin containers once used, shall not be re-used for packaging of food19a:T9e4,From the pages of The Hindu, July 4, 1974: Edible oil adulterated with used motor oil thehindu.com New Delhi, July 3: An all-India sample survey conducted by Consumer Council of India has revealed that used motor oil is being utilised for adulteration with edible oils, hair oils etc, after being refined.
On the basis of this finding, the Consumer Council has written to the Ministry of Petroleum and Chemicals to take steps to check this practice which poses a serious health hazard.
The survey covered nearly 250 petrol stations where cars are also serviced. It was found that most of these service stations sold the used motor oil drained from cars during service, to the highest bidder who refined it at a hideout and sold it for adulteration with edible oils and hair oils of popular brands.
In Madras, 40 service stations were surveyed which were found to sell 2,500 litres of waste oil every day. In Bangalore, 15 service stations were surveyed which sold 1,000 litres per day. The largest daily sale of 4,000 litres of used oil was reported from Calcutta where 50 service stations were surveyed.
The Consumer Council, which has as its chairman the Union Deputy Minister for Labour, Mr. Balgovind Varma, has also referred to the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission about 100 cases where retail traders insist on consumers buying goods they do not need, as a condition for making available essential items to them.
The retailers are reported to have passed on the blame to manufacturers’ representatives and wholesale distributors who refuse to supply the retailer essential articles unless they buy non-salable items too.
Published - July 04, 2024 05:09 am IST edible oil adulteration used motor oil written to Ministry of Petroleum and Chemicals referred to Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission alleged India edible oil fflo:hasAdulterant used motor oil used motor oil is being utilised for adulteration with edible oils hair oil fflo:hasAdulterant used motor oil adulteration with edible oils, hair oils etc all-India sample survey fflo:identifies used motor oil An all-India sample survey... has revealed that used motor oil is being utilised used motor oil fflo:commonIn Madras In Madras, 40 service stations were surveyed which were found to sell 2,500 litres used motor oil fflo:commonIn Bangalore In Bangalore, 15 service stations were surveyed which sold 1,000 litres used motor oil fflo:commonIn Calcutta largest daily sale of 4,000 litres of used oil was reported from Calcutta19b:T68a,Duplicate ghee factory busted | Surat News - Times of India indiatimes.com Surat: Navsari police have busted a duplicate ghee-making factory that was operating from Onchi village. The duplicate cow ghee was being made by mixing palm oil, colouring and flavouring agents.
Based on a tip-off, the local crime branch (LCB) sleuths of Navsari raided the factory and seized 3,133 kg of adulterated ghee to the tune of Rs 14.94 lakh on Sunday.
The factory where the adulterated cow ghee was being made was operating under the name of Shiv Food Products run by two brothers - Vicky Chokhawala (27) and Lav Chokhawala (23). 
Police have also roped in officers from the Food and Drugs Control Administration who have collected samples from the factory.
âWe will be registered a formal FIR after receiving the sample reports,â said V J Jadeja, LCB police inspector.
The adulterated ghee was being sold under the brand name of âShukhwantâ cow ghee at the factory run by the two brothers, native of Banaskantha district of North Gujarat.
âOut of the two brothers, Vicky had earlier worked with a ghee trader in Banaskantha. With the idea of starting his own unit, he came to Navsari where he had rented this factory premises to make the duplicate ghee,â said Jadeja. ghee adulteration seizure recall_triggered India, Onchi village, Navsari ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil duplicate cow ghee was being made by mixing palm oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant colouring agents duplicate cow ghee was being made by mixing palm oil, colouring and flavouring agents ghee fflo:hasAdulterant flavouring agents duplicate cow ghee was being made by mixing palm oil, colouring and flavouring agents19c:T621,FDCA Seizes â_x0082_¹14 Lakh Worth of Adulterated Ghee and Palmolein Oil in Navsari | Ahmedabad News - Times of India indiatimes.com Adulterated ghee, palmolein oil worth â¹14L seized
Gandhinagar: The state Food and Drugs Control Administration (FDCA) raided a unit in Navsari and seized suspected adulterated ghee and palmolein oil worth Rs 14 lakh, a FDCA statement said on Sunday.
Teams conducted a raid at Shiv Food Products in Navsari, where it was found that ghee was being adulterated with palmolein oil. Eight samples have been collected and sent to the laboratory for tests, the statement said.
The statement added that 3,000kg of ghee and palmolein oil worth Rs 14 lakh has been seized.
The company sold ghee under the brand name Sukhwant. Samples were collected in the presence of unit owner Vicky Chokhawala. ghee palmolein oil adulteration palmolein oil seizure suspected Navsari, Gujarat, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palmolein oil ghee was being adulterated with palmolein oil Adulteration of ghee with palmolein oil prov:used ghee ghee was being adulterated with palmolein oil Eight samples of ghee and palmolein oil fflo:collectedAt Shiv Food Products Teams conducted a raid at Shiv Food Products in Navsari, where it was found that ghee was being adulterated with palmolein oil. Eight samples have been collected ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palmolein oil ghee was being adulterated with palmolein oil Adulteration of ghee with palmolein oil prov:wasAssociatedWith Vicky Chokhawala Samples were collected in the presence of unit owner Vicky Chokhawala19d:T808,Food safety team seizes fake ghee at Jhotwara retail mart | Jaipur News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Jaipur: During an inspection at a retail mart in Jhotwara on Saturday, a team of food safety officers found two litres of counterfeit Saras ghee, which was seized.
 Representatives from Saras Dairy also arrived at the spot. 
According to a health department officer, investigations into ghee from other companies are currently underway. An FIR against D Mart at a mall in Jhotwara is being combined with a previous FIR by Saras Dairy, he added.
Similarly, during an inspection by the food safety department team and the Saras Dairy team at Anuj Trading Company located in Kukarkheda, 430 packets of one-litre and 230 packets of half-litre Saras ghee, manufactured by Ajmer Dairy, were found in the shop. No Saras ghee manufactured by Jaipur Saras Dairy was discovered. 
The Saras team confirmed its authenticity, and Ajmer Saras Dairy was notified for a comprehensive investigation. One sample from each packet was taken. The sale of this ghee has been halted until the test report is received.
Furthermore, an inspection was conducted at Messrs Khandelwal Dhaba located on Mahal Road, Jagatpura, where cleanliness was unsatisfactory. All food items were uncovered. The working staff lacked medical certificates, and there was no water test report. Pest control records were also missing. The materials used for cooking were stored in empty drums of paint, chemicals, and adhesive, which were emptied on the spot and mandated to be kept in steel drums. ghee adulteration counterfeit Saras ghee seizure FIR alleged Jaipur, Rajasthan, India counterfeit Saras ghee fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee counterfeit Saras ghee counterfeit Saras ghee seizure prov:wasAttributedTo D Mart An FIR against D Mart Saras ghee found in shop prov:wasAttributedTo Anuj Trading Company found in the shop Saras ghee sale fflo:targets ghee sale of this ghee has been halted Messrs Khandelwal Dhaba fflo:foundAt Jagatpura Messrs Khandelwal Dhaba located on Mahal Road, Jagatpura19e:T6d9,FIR registered against retail mart, company in adulterated ghee case | Jaipur News - Times of India indiatimes.com Jaipur: A day after seizures of adulterated ghee of fake brands of Saras and Pro-Vedic, govt-run Saras Dairy on Friday lodged FIRs against D-Mart and Khandelwal and Company for copyright violation. One FIR each was lodged at Malviya Nagar and Murlipura police station in the city.
Food safety teams had seized Saras and Pro-Vedic brands of ghee on Thursday from the Malviya Nagar situated branch of D-Mart store.
âAs per the information from D-Mart, it was found that 2,700 litre of ghee was still left. We instructed the manager of D-Mart to collect the stock at one place for seizure. However, D-Mart returned the stock of ghee to its vender through transfer note on Friday. Thus, we are taking acting against D-Mart and have issued notices to the mart,â said Pankaj Ojha, additional commissioner of food and safety department on Friday. Investigation has also revealed that the firm from which Saras ghee has been purchased by D-Mart is not the authorized distributor of Saras Dairy and boxes of fake ghee have been recovered from there.
âSaras Dairy has also lodged two FIRs for violation of Copyright Act against Khandelwal & Company and D-Mart at Malviya Nagar and Murlipura police stations,â Ojha added. On the information of fake and adulterated ghee, teams have been sent to other places, including Dausa and Niwai, he added. ghee adulteration counterfeit fake ghee FIR registered seizure notices issued alleged Jaipur, Rajasthan, India fake ghee fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee adulterated ghee of fake brands of Saras and Pro-Vedic seizure of adulterated ghee fflo:inRegion Jaipur Jaipur: A day after seizures of adulterated ghee19f:Tb77,450 litre spurious ghee seized from retail mart in city | Jaipur News - Times of India indiatimes.com Jaipur: A team of food safety commissionerate on Thursday seized 450 litre of adulterated ghee during a raid at D-Mart store in Malviya Nagar under the âShuddha Aahar-Adulteration Par Vaar Abhiyanâ. The spurious ghee was sold under popular brands.
The action was taken under the supervision of food safety commissioner Iqbal Khan and additional commissioner Pankaj Ojha.
âA complaint was received about fake pro vedic ghee being sold at D-Mart store in Malviya Nagar. A team reached D-Mart for investigation. It found that pro vedic ghee was substandard. There were many boxes of Saras Ghee with the same batch number and series. The quality control manager and analyst of Saras Dairy were called and an investigation was launched. In the investigation, the ghee was found to be adulterated,â said Ojha.
The ghee supplied to D-Mart by the distributor was mixed with cans of adulterated ghee. âWe have taken action against the distributor Khandelwal & Company near Vishwakarma Industrial Area, Kukar Kheda. Cans of spurious Saras Ghee were recovered from cartons. A representative of Saras Dairy was called on the spot who certified that the ghee was adulterated. The adulterated ghee was seized and samples were taken,â he added.
The team seized 450 litre of ghee. âWe have asked the area sales manager of D-Mart to stop supply of pro vedic ghee and Saras Ghee kept in all the stores and warehouses of Jaipur and not to sell it until further order,â the officer added.
Further investigations revealed that Khandelwal & Company had been supplying the adulterated ghee to various stores across Jaipur for several months. The company had been sourcing fake ghee from a small-scale manufacturing unit on the outskirts of the city. The unit was raided by the food safety team and the owner was taken into custody.
Food safety commissioner Iqbal Khan said, âAdulteration of food products will not be tolerated under any circumstances. Peopleâs health is our top priority.â ghee adulteration seizure recall_triggered India, Jaipur supplying adulterated ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith Khandelwal & Company Khandelwal & Company had been supplying the adulterated ghee sourcing fake ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith small-scale manufacturing unit sourcing fake ghee from a small-scale manufacturing unit adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt Retail seized 450 litre of adulterated ghee during a raid at D-Mart store adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt Distribution ghee supplied to D-Mart by the distributor was mixed with cans of adulterated ghee adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt Retail supplying the adulterated ghee to various stores fake ghee fflo:foundAt Production sourcing fake ghee from a small-scale manufacturing unit sourcing fake ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith owner The unit was raided by the food safety team and the owner was taken into custody.1a0:T1a10,Fake Edible Oil Ingredients: 6 harmful ingredients found in fake edible oil | - Times of India indiatimes.com The global food industry has seen a worrying rise in the prevalence of counterfeit products, and edible oil is no exception. The use of fake edible oils, which often contain harmful ingredients, poses significant health risks. Recently, a disturbing incident underscored this threat when 18,000 litres of fake edible oil were seized in Ajmer, Rajasthan by the Food Safety and Standards Association of India (FSSAI) which highlights the ongoing threat posed by food adulteration. As per a recent tweet by FSSAI, âThe fake cooking oil was being prepared by using duplicated labels of various famous brands by misbranding these items, along with adulteration.â We bring you a list of some of the ingredients that are added to edible oils and can be extremely harmful to your health.
Mineral oilMineral oil, a byproduct of petroleum, is sometimes added to fake edible oils to increase volume and reduce costs. Although used in non-food products, its ingestion can cause serious health issues, including gastrointestinal problems, liver damage, and even cancer with prolonged exposure. The inclusion of mineral oil in edible products is a clear violation of food safety standards.
ALSO READ: 5 drinks that ICMR has suggested to consume and avoid during summersArgemone oilArgemone oil is another hazardous adulterant found in fake edible oil. Extracted from the seeds of the Argemone mexicana plant, this oil is toxic and can cause epidemic dropsy, a condition characterised by swelling, glaucoma, and even heart failure. Consuming argemone oil-contaminated products poses severe health risks, making its presence in food products extremely dangerous.
Cottonseed oilWhile cottonseed oil is used in the food industry, its unrefined form can be harmful due to the presence of gossypol, a naturally occurring toxin that can cause reproductive issues and liver damage. Unscrupulous producers might mix unrefined cottonseed oil with edible oils to cut costs, disregarding the potential health hazards associated with its consumption.
Castor oilCastor oil, primarily used for industrial and medicinal purposes, is sometimes added to fake edible oil mixtures. Ricinoleic acid, the main component of castor oil, can cause severe gastrointestinal issues if ingested in large quantities. The use of castor oil in food products is highly inappropriate and poses significant health risks to consumers.
ALSO READ: Popular eating joints in India that have violated food safety and sanitation normsCheap vegetable oilsCheap vegetable oils like palm oil or soybean oil are often mixed with higher-quality oils and sold as pure products. While not inherently toxic, the deceptive labelling and lower nutritional value of these oils undermine consumer trust and can lead to health issues associated with excessive consumption of certain fats. The nutritional quality and intended health benefits of pure oils are compromised in such adulterated products.
Artificial colouring and flavouring agentsTo mask the adulteration and make fake oils appear genuine, producers often add artificial colouring and flavouring agents. These chemicals can cause allergic reactions, digestive issues, and other health problems. Long-term exposure to certain artificial additives is linked to more severe conditions, including cancer and neurological disorders.
(Thumb Image courtesy: Canva) edible oil adulteration counterfeit mislabeling Argemone oil seizure alleged Ajmer, Rajasthan, India Fake edible oil seizure in Ajmer fflo:inRegion Ajmer, Rajasthan 18,000 litres of fake edible oil were seized in Ajmer, Rajasthan seizure of 18,000 litres of fake edible oil fflo:issuedBy Food Safety and Standards Association of India 18,000 litres of fake edible oil were seized in Ajmer, Rajasthan by the Food Safety and Standards Association of India gossypol fflo:causesEffect reproductive issues gossypol, a naturally occurring toxin that can cause reproductive issues Castor oil fflo:causesEffect severe gastrointestinal issues Ricinoleic acid, the main component of castor oil, can cause severe gastrointestinal issues Ricinoleic acid fflo:causesEffect severe gastrointestinal issues Ricinoleic acid, the main component of castor oil, can cause severe gastrointestinal issues edible oil fflo:hasAdulterant Argemone oil Argemone oil is another hazardous adulterant found in fake edible oil mineral oil fflo:causesEffect gastrointestinal problems ingestion can cause serious health issues, including gastrointestinal problems mineral oil fflo:causesEffect liver damage ingestion can cause serious health issues, including gastrointestinal problems, liver damage mineral oil fflo:causesEffect cancer even cancer with prolonged exposure misbranding fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling using duplicated labels of various famous brands by misbranding mineral oil fflo:hasDefinition a byproduct of petroleum Mineral oil, a byproduct of petroleum Argemone oil fflo:causesEffect epidemic dropsy this oil is toxic and can cause epidemic dropsy Argemone oil fflo:causesEffect glaucoma characterised by swelling, glaucoma, and even heart failure Argemone oil fflo:causesEffect heart failure characterised by swelling, glaucoma, and even heart failure gossypol fflo:causesEffect liver damage toxin that can cause reproductive issues and liver damage cottonseed oil fkg:hasIngredient gossypol unrefined form can be harmful due to the presence of gossypol artificial colouring fflo:causesEffect allergic reactions These chemicals can cause allergic reactions artificial colouring and flavouring agents fflo:causesEffect digestive issues These chemicals can cause allergic reactions, digestive issues artificial flavouring fflo:causesEffect allergic reactions These chemicals can cause allergic reactions artificial flavouring agents fflo:causesEffect digestive issues These chemicals can cause allergic reactions, digestive issues artificial colouring fflo:causesEffect cancer Long-term exposure to certain artificial additives is linked to more severe conditions, including cancer artificial flavouring fflo:causesEffect cancer Long-term exposure to certain artificial additives is linked to more severe conditions, including cancer artificial colouring fflo:causesEffect neurological disorders Long-term exposure to certain artificial additives is linked to more severe conditions, including cancer and neurological disorders artificial flavouring fflo:causesEffect neurological disorders Long-term exposure to certain artificial additives is linked to more severe conditions, including cancer and neurological disorders1a1:Td58,Health News: Warning signs of diabetes seen in morning, how to identify fake cooking oil, laptop related health issues, common signs of vitamin A deficiency, and more | - The Times of India indiatimes.com Read today's health news briefing here. Your morning dose of health updates, news and latest guidelines are all here:
News18,000 fake cooking oil seized, how to identify such oils: Nearly 18,000 litres of fake cooking oil was seized in Ajmer. Here arises an important question, what is fake cooking oil? 
How to identify whether the cooking oil that we purchase from the market is fake or genuine?Consuming alcohol on flights can lower oxygen level in blood:For those who enjoy drinking alcohol on flights, a new study has made some shocking revelations. A new study published online in the respiratory journal Thorax, 
drinking and napping on long haul flights may not be good for the heart, even among the young and healthy as it can lower the amount of oxygen in the blood (SpO2) and increase the heart rate for a protracted period.
Diet can help reduce premature deaths in women:Women consuming the largely plant-based 
Mediterranean diet were found to be at a 23 per cent lower risk of dying prematurely, the study found. The findings were published in The Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA).
Health tipsEarly signs of diabetes seen in morning: Diabetes, a chronic condition characterized by elevated blood glucose levels, can manifest various symptoms at different times of the day. Notably, 
some warning signs are particularly evident during the morning hours. Understanding these symptoms can help in early detection and management of the condition.
Do you place your laptop on your lap? Read this:Laptops have seamlessly integrated into our daily routines, offering portability and convenience that is hard to resist. However, despite their name and widespread use, 
placing a laptop on your lap isn't advisable. This habit can significantly impact male reproductive health due to elevated scrotal temperature and potential exposure to electromagnetic radiation. Therefore, it's essential to be mindful of how and where we use laptops to safeguard our well-being.
How sugar isn't the only cause of diabetes: Diabetes is a complex and multifactorial disease that affects millions of people globally. 
While the consumption of sugar is often highlighted as the primary cause of diabetes this perspective just oversimplifies the main issue. Diabetes, particularly type-2 diabetes is influenced by a number of factors like genetics, lifestyle choices, and environmental factors.
Common signs of vitamin A deficiency:Vitamin A is a crucial nutrient vital for maintaining optimal vision, a robust immune system, and the proper functioning of essential organs like the heart, lungs, and kidneys. Unfortunately, despite its significance, numerous individuals, particularly in developing nations, experience a deficiency in this essential vitamin. Such a deficit can give rise to various health issues. Here, 
we highlight six prevalent indicators of vitamin A deficiency and recommend the finest natural sources to help you meet your body's requirements for this vital nutrient. cooking oil counterfeit adulteration fake cooking oil seizure suspected Ajmer, Rajasthan, India Seizure of fake cooking oil in Ajmer fflo:inRegion Ajmer Nearly 18,000 litres of fake cooking oil was seized in Ajmer.1a2:T1a7d,How to identify fake cooking oil? (FSSAI recommended tips) - Times of India indiatimes.com Nearly 18,000 litres of fake cooking oil was seized by the medical department in Ajmer, the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (
FSSAI) has tweeted. "About 18 thousand liters of misbranded edible oil was seized on Thursday #Ajmer by the medical department in a campaign against #à¤®à¤¿à¤²à¤¾à¤µà¤ . Here, edible oil was being prepared by using duplicates and different labels of various famous brands and by misbranding and adulteration," the Medical & Health Department, Rajasthan has tweeted on X (formerly Twitter).
In the past, the apex food regulator of the country has seized such adulterated cooking oil manufacturers. Here arises an important question, what is fake cooking oil? How to identify whether the cooking oil that we purchase from the market is fake or genuine?
Identifying fake cooking oil is crucial for both health and economic reasons. Fake or adulterated cooking oils can contain harmful substances and may lack the nutritional benefits of genuine oils. Fake cooking oil refers to oils that are adulterated or not pure. For example, expensive oils like olive oil might be mixed with cheaper ones like soybean or palm oil, industrial oils may be repurposed for cooking and harmful chemicals might be added to alter the appearance or taste.
Hereâs how you can identify fake cooking oils
Genuine oils usually list a single type of oil. 
Multiple oils in the ingredient list may indicate blending. Look for the expected nutritional profile of the oil. Check for certifications like organic, non-GMO, or specific country standards. Make sure the oil is within its expiry date, as expired oil can indicate poor quality.
If the price of the oil is significantly lower than the average market price, it could be an indication of adulteration.
Ensure the bottle is sealed properly. Broken seals or loose caps can indicate tampering. Purchase oils from reputable brands that have established quality standards.
Genuine oils have specific color and clarity. For example, olive oil is usually golden-green, while sunflower oil is pale yellow. Any unusual color or cloudiness can be a red flag.
Genuine oils have characteristic smells. Olive oil, for instance, should have a fresh, fruity aroma. An off or rancid smell indicates spoilage or adulteration.
Poll: What is the first thing you did in the morning immediately after waking up?Taste a small amount of the oil. It should have a clean, natural taste. Any bitterness or odd flavors could indicate contamination.
To use cooking oil for health, opt for oils with beneficial fats like olive, avocado, or coconut oil. These oils contain monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fats that support heart health. Use extra virgin olive oil for salad dressings and low-heat cooking to preserve its nutrients. For high-heat cooking, choose oils with high smoke points, such as avocado or coconut oil, to avoid harmful compounds. Limit the use of oils high in saturated fats, like palm or vegetable oil. Balance oil consumption with a diet rich in fruits, vegetables, lean proteins, and whole grains to maintain overall health.
Simple home tests to check oil quality
- Place a small amount of oil in a clear container and refrigerate it. Pure oils will solidify, while adulterated oils may remain liquid.
- Put the oil in the freezer. Pure olive oil, for example, should start to solidify within 30 minutes.
- Drop a small amount of oil on a white paper and let it dry. Pure oil will leave an even, translucent spot without a greasy ring.
- Take cooking oil in a test tube and add 4 ml of distilled water to it. Shake the test tube for a few seconds. Now take 2 ml of this liquid in another test tube and add 2 ml of concentrated HCL to this. There will be no color change if the oil is unadulterated, however if the oil is adulterated a red color will be seen on the top most layer of the oil.
- To check the purity of coconut oil, take some oil in a container, and keep it in the refrigerator with a temperature between 5-10 degrees. Wait for 60-90 minutes. Pure coconut oil will solidify, however, adulterated oils will have a separate layer on the top due to separate freezing points of the oils. cooking oil mislabeling adulteration seizure suspected Ajmer, Rajasthan, India cooking oil fflo:hasAdulterant industrial oils industrial oils may be repurposed for cooking cooking oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod misbranding Here, edible oil was being prepared by using duplicates and different labels of various famous brands and by misbranding and adulteration olive oil fflo:belongsToCategory Oils opt for oils with beneficial fats like olive cooking oil fflo:hasAdulterant soybean oil olive oil might be mixed with cheaper ones like soybean cooking oil fflo:hasAdulterant harmful chemicals harmful chemicals might be added to alter the appearance misbranding fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling using duplicates and different labels of various famous brands cooking oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod substitution expensive oils like olive oil might be mixed with cheaper ones substitution fflo:hasFraudType Substitution expensive oils like olive oil might be mixed with cheaper ones cooking oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod addition of chemicals harmful chemicals might be added to alter the appearance addition of chemicals fflo:hasFraudType Masking harmful chemicals might be added to alter the appearance or taste cooking oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod multiple oils in ingredient list Multiple oils in the ingredient list may indicate blending Refrigeration Test fflo:producesIndicator Solidification of pure oil Pure oils will solidify, while adulterated oils may remain liquid Freezer Test fflo:producesIndicator Solidification within 30 minutes Pure olive oil, for example, should start to solidify within 30 minutes Paper Spot Test fflo:producesIndicator Even translucent spot without greasy ring Pure oil will leave an even, translucent spot without a greasy ring HCL Color Test fflo:producesIndicator Red color change if the oil is adulterated a red color will be seen HCL Color Test fflo:producesIndicator No color change There will be no color change if the oil is unadulterated refrigeration solidification test fflo:producesIndicator separate layer on the top adulterated oils will have a separate layer on the top refrigeration solidification test fflo:producesIndicator solidification of pure coconut oil Pure coconut oil will solidify refrigeration solidification test fflo:producesIndicator separate layer on top adulterated oils will have a separate layer on the top refrigerator test for coconut oil fflo:producesIndicator separate layer on top adulterated oils will have a separate layer on the top1a3:T18b7,Widespread food safety violations uncovered in Telangana hotels, dairy factories siasat.com The Telangana food safety department has conducted more inspections at various hotels across the state and uncovered widespread violations of food safety and hygiene regulations.
In Hanumakonda
Hotel Ashoka
An inspection at Hotel Ashoka on Thursday, May 30 revealed several serious health and safety violations. Health officials discarded 8 kg of idly batter and 5 liters of boiled milk after discovering houseflies in the products. Additionally, synthetic food colors, 11 packets of expired chicken masala, and three bottles of expired sauce were found and discarded.
Cooked food was stored under a roof with spider webs, and oil was leaking from an oil deposit on the roof. Reused cooking oil and expired raw materials were identified, along with label defects on various food articles. Authorities seized 17 packets of Indian noodles and 28 packets of saunf, collecting samples for laboratory analysis.
Moreover, food handlers were found working without proper hairnets, aprons, or gloves, violating hygiene protocols. The hotel also failed to display a copy of its FSSAI license prominently on the premises.
Sri Amogham foods
In another inspection conducted by special teams on Thursday, May 30, at Sri Amogham foods, Nakkalgutta, synthetic food colors were found, 25 kg of raw chicken and 4 kg of cauliflower were discarded due to safety concerns.
Further inspection revealed that the FSSAI license was not prominently displayed, and semi-prepared and raw food articles were improperly stored in refrigerators without proper labeling, covering, or temperature control. The kitchen was open to the outside environment without proper barriers to prevent pest entry, and dustbins were found without lids.
Additionally, food handlers were seen without hair caps, gloves, or aprons, and the establishment lacked medical fitness certificates for food handlers and pest control records. The absence of a water analysis report for the RO water used in cooking and drinking was also noted. Rust formation was observed on several cooking vessels.
Hotel Shreya
Another inspection was conducted at Hotel Shreya, located opposite the bus stand on Thursday, May 30. The team traced the use of synthetic food colors. They discarded and seized 10 kg of raw chicken, 50 rotten eggs, 7 kg of jaggery, 1 kg of spoiled prepared fish tikka, and 3 kg of idly batter.
Prepared food was contaminated with house flies, and fungal infestation was found on cooked chicken stored in the refrigerator. Reused cooking oil was also identified and discarded. The teams also seized 60 drinking water bottles and 10 packets of sweet corn due to label defects.
Food handlers were observed working without hair caps, gloves, aprons, or medical fitness certificates. Open dustbins were placed near cooked food, and an open drainage system was noted in the kitchen. The dining room had perforated walls and dirt deposits.
Additionally, the improper storage of both vegetarian and non-vegetarian food items was noted, with cooked and raw food items kept without maintaining proper temperature controls.
In Rangareddy
Anita Dairy Manufacturing Products
A task force team during inspection at Anita Dairy Manufacturing Products in Pasumamula Village on Thursday, May 30 has revealed significant violations
The team discovered that the factory failed to display its FSSAI license, and water stagnation in the manufacturing area caused a pervasive bad odor.
Masala buttermilk packets were being produced without the necessary license for this food category, leading to the seizure of 12 cartons of raw material labeled ‘Tadka paste 09122-01’. Labeling defects were identified, with the marketer’s address present but not the manufacturer’s details, replaced by a QR code on the packets.
Expired reagents and chemicals in the laboratory were discarded. The microbiologist working there was found to be unqualified. Additionally, some food handlers were not wearing gloves. The factory lacked a transportation license, which was not declared in the central license
All Rich Dairy Private Limited
An another inspection at All Rich Dairy Private Limited has unveiled concerning food safety violations. Rust was observed on transportation trolleys, and water stagnation on the floor emitted a foul odor in the manufacturing area. Inadequate insect-proof screens heightened contamination risks.
The team found food handlers without gloves, headgear, and aprons. The premises lacked the display of an FSSAI license, and the existing license did not comply with FSSAI guidelines, omitting the manufacturer and marketer addresses.
Moreover, medical fitness certificates for food handlers were absent, and no FOSTAC trainee was present at the factory. Authorities seized 263 kg of unlabeled ghee from the premises. Additionally, Transport license not available for the vehicles. ghee adulteration substandard unlabeled seizure alleged Rangareddy, Telangana, India cooked chicken fflo:hasAdulterant fungal infestation fungal infestation was found on cooked chicken synthetic food colors fflo:foundAt Hotel Ashoka synthetic food colors ... were found and discarded IncidentFinding at Hotel Ashoka fflo:identifies synthetic food colors synthetic food colors ... were found and discarded houseflies fflo:foundIn idly batter discarded 8 kg of idly batter after discovering houseflies houseflies fflo:foundIn boiled milk discarding 5 liters of boiled milk after discovering houseflies in the products IncidentFinding at Hotel Ashoka fflo:triggeredAction Seizure of Indian noodles and saunf Authorities seized 17 packets of Indian noodles and 28 packets of saunf Use of synthetic food colors at Sri Amogham foods prov:wasAssociatedWith Sri Amogham foods synthetic food colors were found synthetic food colors fflo:foundAt Sri Amogham foods synthetic food colors were found Use of synthetic food colors at Hotel Shreya prov:wasAssociatedWith Hotel Shreya The team traced the use of synthetic food colors. Adulteration at Hotel Shreya prov:used fish tikka 1 kg of spoiled prepared fish tikka cooked chicken fflo:hasAdulterant house flies Prepared food was contaminated with house flies cooking oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod reuse of cooking oil Reused cooking oil was also identified1a4:T98f,Over 12,000 litre of âspuriousâ oil seized | Jaipur News - Times of India indiatimes.com Jaipur: Food Safety and Drug Control Commissionerate teams on Tuesday seized 6,683 litre of edible oil in Muhana Mandi and 6,000 litre at a factory in Niwai on suspicion of substandard quality.
Health department officials said they had received information about substandard mustard oil of Ranthambore brand coming from Niwai in Tonk district to Muhana Anaj Mandi in Jaipur.
Upon surveillance, the goods were found being unloaded at Muhana Mandi. Samples of the oil were taken under the Food Safety Act 2006, and 6,683 litre seized due to suspicion of substandard quality.
Officials said samples of this edible oil had been taken a few days earlier and were found to be of substandard quality. 
Tonk chief medical health officer (CMHO) Ashok Yadav was informed about the action. Subsequently, the CMHO of Tonk reached the factory in Niwai Industrial Area and seized approximately 6,000 litre of Ranthambore brand Kacchi Ghani oil. Food safety officer Suresh Kumar was present during the action.
In another case, inspection was done at Vinayak Bakers at Hawa Sadak, Jaipur. Food safety officers found expired materials at the bakery, which were seized. Action is now being taken to suspend its food licence. Ranthambore brand mustard oil substandard seizure suspected Jaipur, Rajasthan, India Ranthambore brand mustard oil fflo:belongsToCategory Oils substandard mustard oil of Ranthambore brand seizure of 6,683 litre of edible oil fflo:issuedBy Food Safety and Drug Control Commissionerate Food Safety and Drug Control Commissionerate teams on Tuesday seized 6,683 litre of edible oil Ranthambore brand mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant substandard quality substandard mustard oil of Ranthambore brand seizure of 6,000 litre of Ranthambore brand Kacchi Ghani oil fflo:issuedBy Food Safety and Drug Control Commissionerate CMHO of Tonk reached the factory in Niwai Industrial Area and seized approximately 6,000 litre Vinayak Bakers fflo:foundAtStep Hawa Sadak, Jaipur inspection was done at Vinayak Bakers at Hawa Sadak, Jaipur finding of expired materials fflo:triggeredAction suspension of food licence Food safety officers found expired materials at the bakery, which were seized. Action is now being taken to suspend its food licence Food Safety Act 2006 fflo:appliesToFood mustard oil Samples of the oil were taken under the Food Safety Act 20061a5:T6f4,Seizure of 4,000L Substandard Ghee in Kota District | Jaipur News - Times of India indiatimes.com Jaipur: The Food Safety and Drug Control Commission seized 4,000 litre of substandard ghee labelled 'Shri Saras' from Kota on Friday night, a day after confiscating 13,700 litre of the same ghee in Jaipur.
Pankaj Ojha, additional food commissioner, received information about a company in Kota producing counterfeit ghee. 
He alerted chief medical health officer (Kota) Jagdish Soni, who conducted a sudden raid with food safety officers and district administration support.
At around 10:30pm, Arvind Jain, owner of Sandeep Trading Company', was summoned to unlock the warehouse, where officials discovered the 4,000 litre of substandard ghee. 
The team took samples and seized the adulterated ghee till late night.
On Friday, a separate raid in the Vishwakarma Industrial Area led to the seizure of 13,700 litre of misbranded ghee also labeled 'Shri Saras', infringing upon the Saras brand name. ghee adulteration mislabeling substandard seizure alleged Kota, Rajasthan, India Seizure of 4,000 litre of substandard ghee fflo:issuedBy Food Safety and Drug Control Commission Food Safety and Drug Control Commission seized 4,000 litre of substandard ghee Production of counterfeit ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith Sandeep Trading Company company in Kota producing counterfeit ghee Production of counterfeit ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith Arvind Jain Arvind Jain, owner of Sandeep Trading Company substandard ghee fflo:foundAt Storage unlock the warehouse, where officials discovered the 4,000 litre misbranded ghee fflo:foundAtStep Processing raid in the Vishwakarma Industrial Area led to the seizure Seizure of substandard ghee in Kota prov:used ghee seized 4,000 litre of substandard ghee1a6:Tbca,2 fall ill after consuming McDonald’s cheese and Theobroma cake indiatimes.com NOIDA: Teams of food safety and drug administration collected samples of palm oil, cheese and mayonnaise from a McDonald’s outlet in Sector 18 and pineapple cake from Theobroma in Sector 104 following complaints from customers that they fell ill after having food from these eateries.
Officials said the samples had been sent to Lucknow and the reports would be available only after a month.
If the products are found to be substandard, action would be taken against the companies. 
“A couple of weeks ago, we received two complaints regarding the quality of food on the FSSAI (Food Safety and Standards Authority of India) portal. A person from Noida, who had ordered a burger online from a McDonald’s outlet in Sector 18, alleged that the food was stale. Our team visited the restaurant and collected samples of palm oil, cheese and mayonnaise – all of which are used to make a burger. These were sent for testing to a state govt lab in Lucknow,” said Archana Dheeran, assistant commissioner (food) II in Noida.
The same day, Dheeran said, a customer lodged a complaint about a pineapple cake she had had from a Theobroma outlet in Sector 104. The customer — a woman — lodged a written complaint on the FSSAI portal and dialled the toll-free number too.
“The woman alleged her health condition deteriorated after having the cake she had ordered from the bakery. We visited the outlet and took a sample of pineapple cake for testing. In both cases, the reports will be available in a month,” the senior official added.
Calls and messages to the two outlets did not elicit any response. 
What if the samples are found to be substandard?
“According to procedure, the company that made the product would be sent a notice and asked to explain why their food failed the 
quality test. If the eatery is not happy with the test result, it can appeal for further testing of the sample at a central govt lab. But if the samples are found to be of poor quality again, the company would be slapped with a hefty penalty,” said Nitin Madan, additional district magistrate.
Complaints about food quality and adulteration are increasingly being lodged on the FSSAI portal, officials agreed. palm oil substandard contamination suspected Noida, Gautam Buddha Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, India burger fkg:hasIngredient palm oil palm oil, cheese and mayonnaise – all of which are used to make a burger burger fkg:hasIngredient cheese cheese and mayonnaise – all of which are used to make a burger burger fkg:hasIngredient mayonnaise mayonnaise – all of which are used to make a burger IncidentFinding_pineapple_cake prov:wasAttributedTo Theobroma complaint about a pineapple cake she had had from a Theobroma outlet HealthEffect_deterioration fflo:hasEffectType AcuteEffect health condition deteriorated after having the cake IncidentFinding_pineapple_cake fflo:supportedBy FSSAI Portal lodged a written complaint on the FSSAI portal1a7:T6ea,Fdca Seizes 2,700 Litres Of Adulterated Ghee | Ahmedabad News - Times of India indiatimes.com Ahmedabad: Gujarat state Food and Drug Control Administration (FDCA) team has seized a stock of around 2,700 litres of suspected adulterated ghee worth around Rs 17 lakh from Palanpur. The manufacturer had been caught earlier too for adulteration. 
FDCA commissioner H G Koshia said, âWe are committed to ensure that people get quality food items and keep taking samples.
Following information that suspectedly adulterated ghee is manufactured at M/S Dhanvi Enterprise in Gajanand Market, Palanpur, our team raided the premises. Our team took six samples of Anmol Premium brand ghee and one sample of loose ghee in the presence of the firmâs owner, Hitesh Gordhan Modi. We also seized a 2,730-litre stock of ghee worth Rs 17 lakh. He used to buy ghee from outside and package it for sale in other states. We found Dhanvi Enterprises had been raided earlier too and adulterated ghee seized. The owner was fined Rs 21 lakh in three adjudicating cases. We will investigate more and take legal action against the firmâs promoter.â tnn ghee adulteration seizure suspected Palanpur, Gujarat, India Adulteration of ghee at M/S Dhanvi Enterprise prov:wasAssociatedWith M/S Dhanvi Enterprise suspectedly adulterated ghee is manufactured at M/S Dhanvi Enterprise Adulteration of ghee at M/S Dhanvi Enterprise prov:used ghee suspectedly adulterated ghee is manufactured at M/S Dhanvi Enterprise Seizure of 2,700 litres of ghee fflo:targets ghee seized a stock of around 2,700 litres of suspected adulterated ghee Seizure of 2,700 litres of ghee fflo:issuedBy Gujarat state Food and Drug Control Administration Gujarat state Food and Drug Control Administration (FDCA) team has seized1a8:T81a,Duplicate Ghee Of Sumul Brand Seized | Surat News - Times of India indiatimes.com Surat: Teams of Sumul dairy, Surat Municipal Corporation (SMC) and police raided a shop in the Kapodra area and seized duplicate being sold under the dairyâs brand name. 
The raid was carried out in Hasmukha Hanuman Dairy and Bakery shop and its owner Kishan Viramgama (Patel) was arrested. Police seized eight pouches of duplicate ghee being sold as a Sumul brand.
The ghee supplier identified as Pratik Thakkar was also booked. 
Relevant sections of the IPC, Trademarks Act, Copyright Act and Prevention of Food Adulteration Act were invoked against the accused.
The complaint was filed by Sumul Dairyâs legal officer Dipesh Bhatt. On April 1, Bhatt got information that a dairy in Kapodra was selling duplicate ghee of the Sumul brand. Bhatt informed SMC food department officers Aparna Nayak and Sejal Vyas and the Kapodra police. They raided the dairy in Kaivatnagar Society along with two witnesses on Apr 1. 
 âThree pouches of one litre ghee and five pouches of 500 ML were seized. All the pouches had Sumul brand on them. When Bhatt checked, these did not belong to the batches produced by the dairy. When police asked Viramgama, he told them that a person Pratik Thakkar had supplied the ghee to him,â said police 
Meanwhile, SMC officials have taken the ghee samples and sent them for laboratory tests ghee adulteration seizure arrest testing pending_test India, Surat Duplicate Ghee Supply Act prov:wasAssociatedWith Pratik Thakkar ghee supplier identified as Pratik Thakkar was also booked Selling duplicate ghee as Sumul brand fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling duplicate ghee being sold as a Sumul brand Selling duplicate ghee as Sumul brand fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional duplicate ghee being sold as a Sumul brand IncidentFinding_948eda84_001 fflo:foundIn ghee SMC officials have taken the ghee samples IncidentFinding_948eda84_001 fflo:foundAtStep Retail raided a shop in the Kapodra area IncidentFinding_948eda84_001 fflo:inRegion Surat Surat News - Times of India Surat1a9:T63d,Ghee Sample Fails Quality Test | Jaipur News - Times of India indiatimes.com Jaipur: In a surprise inspection of 21 milk and paneer shops in Shastri Nagarâs doodh mandi on Thursday, food safety officers found adulterated ghee being sold at the market. In addition to five samples of ghee, some samples of mawa and cheese were also found to be suspicious.. A team of food safety officers collected 47 samples of paneer, mawa and ghee and tested them on the spot in mobile lab.
Nine samples of suspicious ghee, mawa and cheese were taken for tests. The team seized 20kg ghee at Balaji Paneer House after its ghee sample failed the quality test. Improvement notice has been given under the Food Safety Act after deficiencies were found in RK Dairy and Deepak Dairy.
Chief medical and health officer, Jaipur (I), Dr Ravi Shekhawat said that samples of ghee and cheese from Deepak Dairy, sample of ghee from Balaji Dairy, paneer and mawa samples from Dhabhai Paneer Industry were taken. ghee adulteration adulterated ghee Improvement notice seizure suspected Jaipur, Rajasthan, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant adulterated ghee found adulterated ghee being sold at the market Deficiencies found in RK Dairy fflo:triggeredAction Improvement notice Improvement notice has been given under the Food Safety Act after deficiencies were found in RK Dairy suspicious cheese finding fflo:foundAtStep Retail samples of mawa and cheese were also found to be suspicious ghee sample failed the quality test prov:wasAttributedTo Balaji Paneer House seized 20kg ghee at Balaji Paneer House after its ghee sample failed1aa:Taf0,Life Imprisonment for Selling Duplicate Ghee of Prominent Brands in Kanpur | Kanpur News - Times of India indiatimes.com Kanpur: Additional district judge Ram Avatar Prasad on Thursday awarded life imprisonment to two accused for selling duplicate desi ghee of prominent companies. The court also slapped a fine of Rs 1.62 lakh on each.
 The accused were identified as Rajendra Prasad Maurya, a resident of New Azad Nagar Chakeri and Vinod Kumar Prajapati, resident of Harjinder Nagar.
The third co-accused Manoj Kumar Gupta, resident of Dev Nagar Raipurwa had died during the trial hence the case against him was abated.
According to additional district government counsel Arvind Diman, senior superintendent of Special Task Force (STF) had received a complaint that some persons were selling duplicate desi ghee in the name of Parag and Amul in Prayagraj, Fatehpur, and Kanpur. They were using tetra packs and poly packs of known brands.
The STF team after conducting an investigation raided a premises in Gandhi Nagar locality on March 3, 2009 and found three persons packing adulterated desi ghee.
During interrogation they revealed that they used to add butter flavour in vegetable refined oil to prepare desi ghee and sell it after packing it into packs printed in the name of famous companies. The ADGC stated that the court had framed charges against them on July 22, 2013 and prosecution presented as many as eight witnesses.They were punished under section 272/273 IPC, he added. tnn ghee adulteration counterfeit vegetable refined oil butter flavour life imprisonment fine alleged Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India desi ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable refined oil add butter flavour in vegetable refined oil to prepare desi ghee desi ghee fflo:hasAdulterant butter flavour add butter flavour in vegetable refined oil to prepare desi ghee desi ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod adding butter flavour in vegetable refined oil add butter flavour in vegetable refined oil to prepare desi ghee Selling duplicate desi ghee in Kanpur prov:wasAssociatedWith Rajendra Prasad Maurya awarded life imprisonment to two accused for selling duplicate desi ghee Adulteration of Desi Ghee in Kanpur prov:wasAssociatedWith Vinod Kumar Prajapati awarded life imprisonment to two accused for selling duplicate desi ghee Adulteration of Desi Ghee in Kanpur prov:used desi ghee selling duplicate desi ghee Adulteration of Desi Ghee in Kanpur prov:used vegetable refined oil add butter flavour in vegetable refined oil to prepare desi ghee butter flavour prov:wasGeneratedBy Adulteration of Desi Ghee in Kanpur add butter flavour in vegetable refined oil to prepare desi ghee Adding butter flavour to vegetable refined oil fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling add butter flavour in vegetable refined oil to prepare desi ghee1ab:T9e4,DCA raids clinics, seizes fake organic oils with false claims thehansindia.com Hyderabad: Telangana State Drugs Control Administration (DCA) seized 'aio organic almond oil, walnut oil, and kalonji oil' from a clinic in Shalibanda for promoting misleading health benefits claims. The raid targeted the manufacturing site of these products, which were found to bear false claims. The officers seized stocks worth Rs 21,000.
In a separate incident, DCA, in collaboration with Vigilance and Enforcement officials on March 2, raided a quack’s clinic in Irikigudem village, Damarcherla mandal, Nalgonda district, and confiscated drugs intended for sale. Dasari Mallaiah, a quack from Nalgonda district, claimed to be a ‘Rural Medical Practitioner’ but was practicing medicine without proper qualifications.  
The Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Act 1954 prohibits misleading advertisements claiming treatment for serious ailments like cancer, heart disease, diabetes, and obesity.  
Further investigations will be conducted, and legal action will be taken against offenders under the Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Act 1954 for misleading advertising about disease treatments.  
The raid uncovered a large stash of medicines, including antibiotics, steroids, analgesics, cough syrups, and others, worth Rs 45,000, stored without any drug license. The officials also seized higher-generation ‘antibiotic injections’, highlighting the grave public health risks associated with the indiscriminate sale of antibiotics by unqualified individuals. Samples were gathered for analysis, and further investigations are being conducted to pursue legal action against the offenders.  
Wholesalers and dealers who deliver drugs to unqualified individuals while operating without a drug licence are also subject to the Drugs and Cosmetics Act and will face harsh penalties. Wholesalers and dealers must ensure that receivers have legitimate drug licences before delivering medicines to them. The DCA enforces the Drugs and Cosmetics Act by issuing drug licences and conducting surprise checks on unqualified individuals involved in drug sales. The public can report any illegal activities related to medicines to the DCA via the toll-free number 1800-599-6969, available from 10:30 am to 5 pm. almond oil walnut oil kalonji oil mislabeling counterfeit seizure suspected Hyderabad, Telangana, India Mislabeling of organic status fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling fake organic oils with false claims1ac:T887,MP: Spice Grinding Unit Sealed For Flouting Norms freepressjournal.in Amjhera (Madhya Pradesh): In a recent crackdown against adulteration, the food safety team in Dhar district sealed a spice grinding factory operating without a licence in Amjhera. Following the directives of Collector Priyank Mishra, the officials raided the factory operating under the name of KFC Traders at Old Bus Stand Road. During the inspection, it was found that the factory, believed to be owned by Abdul Qadir, was engaged in the manufacturing of chilli powder and coriander powder.
Moreover, 32 packs of Indore-manufactured Heera A One turmeric powder lacking essential labelling information such as batch number, manufacturing date and expiry date were found. Food safety officer Sachin Logaria said samples of chilli powder, Mahi brand refined soybean oil and Heera A One turmeric powder were collected for testing. Further investigation revealed that Qadir lacked the necessary licence under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006.
Consequently, three quintals of turmeric powder and 30 kg of chilli powder was confiscated. The seized materials, valued at Rs 29,987, will undergo testing at the State Food Testing Laboratory in Bhopal. The factory was sealed and further action will be taken under the relevant laws of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. soybean oil substandard mislabeling sealing confiscation suspected Amjhera, Dhar, Madhya Pradesh, India Heera A One turmeric powder fflo:hasAdulterationMethod Mislabeling lacking essential labelling information such as batch number, manufacturing date and expiry date Mahi brand refined soybean oil sample fflo:collectedAt Processing samples of chilli powder, Mahi brand refined soybean oil and Heera A One turmeric powder were collected Testing of seized materials fso:isPerformedAt State Food Testing Laboratory in Bhopal undergo testing at the State Food Testing Laboratory in Bhopal KFC Traders fflo:compliesWith Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 lacked the necessary licence under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 Sealing of spice grinding factory in Amjhera fflo:targets chilli powder 30 kg of chilli powder was confiscated1ad:T801,10k Litre of Spurious Ghee Seized in Jaipur: Fake Ghee Operation Uncovered | Jaipur News - Times of India indiatimes.com Jaipur: As much as 10,465 litres of low-quality ghee packaged under reputed brands such as Krishna, Lotus, Mahan and Amul was seized at a warehouse in Vishwakarma police station area of the city, police said on Wednesday.
Fake and adulterated ghee was being produced at the warehouse of Shri Shyam Sales Corporation at VK I and sold in the market, said Crime Branch officials.
The operator of the ghee-making unit, Shravan Singh Shekhawat, was arrested, they said. Shekhawat was also arrested by Mahesh Nagar and Jhotwara police stations in 2007 and remained in jail for 20 days, they added.
âA raid was conducted on the warehouse in collaboration with local police and the food department on Tuesday. The operation lasted till late night, and 10,465 litres of fake ghee was seized from the premises,â said a CID Crime Branch official.
The authorities had got a tip-off about packaging and sale of fake desi ghee in Vishwakarma police station area. ghee adulteration substitution fake ghee seizure arrest alleged Jaipur, Rajasthan, India Fake Ghee fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee packaging and sale of fake desi ghee Fake Ghee Production at Shri Shyam Sales Corporation prov:wasAssociatedWith Shravan Singh Shekhawat The operator of the ghee-making unit, Shravan Singh Shekhawat, was arrested Fake Ghee Production at Shri Shyam Sales Corporation prov:used ghee Fake and adulterated ghee was being produced at the warehouse Fake Ghee fflo:foundAt Storage seized at a warehouse in Vishwakarma police station area Packaging fake ghee under reputed brands fflo:hasFraudType Substitution low-quality ghee packaged under reputed brands Packaging fake ghee under reputed brands fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling packaged under reputed brands such as Krishna, Lotus, Mahan and Amul Fake Ghee Production at Shri Shyam Sales Corporation prov:wasAssociatedWith Shri Shyam Sales Corporation produced at the warehouse of Shri Shyam Sales Corporation1ae:T415,Food Safety Officers Seize 9,000kg of Spurious Ghee in Jaipur | Jaipur News - Times of India indiatimes.com Jaipur: In a crackdown on food adulteration, health department officers seized 9,000 kilograms of spurious ghee during a raid on Tuesday. The raid, conducted under "Shudh Aahaar, Milawat Par Vaar" campaign, targeted a warehouse of Shree Shyam Sales Corporation on VKI Road.
The seized ghee was packed in fake boxes of popular brands like Lotus, Krishna, Mahan, and Amul.
An FIR was filed at VKI police station, said chief medical health officer Dr Vijay Singh. TNN ghee adulteration mislabeling seizure FIR filed alleged Jaipur, Rajasthan, India Seizure of spurious ghee in Jaipur fflo:inRegion Jaipur Seize 9,000kg of Spurious Ghee in Jaipur Ghee Adulteration Act in Jaipur prov:used ghee seized 9,000 kilograms of spurious ghee Seizure of spurious ghee in Jaipur fflo:foundAtStep Storage targeted a warehouse of Shree Shyam Sales Corporation Ghee Adulteration Method fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling packed in fake boxes of popular brands1af:Ta5e,MP: 200 Litres Adulterated Mustard Oil Found In Jabalpur Oil Factory During Surprise Inspection freepressjournal.in Jabalpur (Madhya Pradesh): A team of food inspectors sealed a Jabalpur based oil factory on Monday after discovering significant contamination and unsanitary conditions within the premises. A barrel containing 200 litres mustard oil failed to meet the quality standards.
The team of food department conducted a surprise inspection at the mustard oil factory 'Bhagwan Oil Mill', located in Ghamapur on Monday and found the production area to be alarmingly dirty. The food inspectors were stunned to see the unhygienic methods and dirty containers being used throughout the process of manufacturing oil.
Following the inspection, the Food Department took immediate action and sealed the factory.
Upon inspection, authorities also collected samples of the oil to investigate possible adulteration. The raid didn't stop at the factory; the team also discovered suspicious packaging of mustard oil from various other companies, indicating a potential wider issue within the industry.
Food safety officer Madhuri Mishra |
Madhuri Mishra, a food safety officer, said that during the inspection, they discovered 200 liters of oil that did not meet the quality standards and was subsequently sealed. Mishra also highlighted a concerning practice where the factory was found to be repackaging oil from other companies using their own packaging, which is a violation of the law. mustard oil substandard contamination mislabeling sealing suspected Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh, India AdulterationAct at Bhagwan Oil Mill prov:wasAssociatedWith Bhagwan Oil Mill surprise inspection at the mustard oil factory 'Bhagwan Oil Mill' AdulterationAct at Bhagwan Oil Mill prov:used mustard oil A barrel containing 200 litres mustard oil failed to meet the quality standards mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod repackaging oil from other companies factory was found to be repackaging oil from other companies Repackaging oil from other companies fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling repackaging oil from other companies using their own packaging mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod unhygienic methods and dirty containers unhygienic methods and dirty containers being used throughout the process of manufacturing oil Bhagwan Oil Mill fflo:foundAt mustard oil 200 litres mustard oil failed to meet the quality standards IncidentFinding at Bhagwan Oil Mill fflo:foundAtStep Processing inspection at the mustard oil factory IncidentFinding at Bhagwan Oil Mill fflo:triggeredAction Sealing of Bhagwan Oil Mill Food Department took immediate action and sealed the factory1b0:T6ee,2.5k Litre Of Spurious Ghee Seized In Pali | Jaipur News - Times of India indiatimes.com Jaipur: Over 2,500 litre of spurious ghee were recovered during a raid conducted by police in the Pali district on Thursday. Sources revealed that the police had received specific intelligence indicating the production of ghee mixed with hazardous chemicals, posing potential detrimental effects on health.
Acting on the intelligence, the Police Headquarters (PHQ) dispatched a team to the Pali district.
This team moved around multiple locations to track down the factory suspected of producing spurious ghee. Upon confirmation of the factory's involvement in the production of spurious ghee, the team raided the compound located on Station Road in the district.
During the raid, police teams reported encountering a foul odour emanating from the production unit. The officials informed TOI that ghee production should adhere to strict hygiene standards and be conducted under a highly sanitized environment, supervised by quality control experts. However, this practice is often flouted in shady production houses. Police have stated that their investigation, in this case, is now focused on tracking down the owner of the factory and ensuring that all other manufacturing units where such ghee is produced are identified and shut down. ghee adulteration substandard hazardous chemicals raid seizure alleged Pali, Rajasthan, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant hazardous chemicals production of ghee mixed with hazardous chemicals hazardous chemicals fflo:causesEffect detrimental effects on health hazardous chemicals, posing potential detrimental effects on health spurious ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod mixing with hazardous chemicals production of ghee mixed with hazardous chemicals1b1:Ta76,Bhiwandi Nizampur civic body seizes 15 kg of ghee mixed with animal fat hindustantimes.com Bhiwandi Nizampur civic body seizes 15 kg of ghee mixed with animal fat
Bhiwandi officials raided a closed slaughterhouse and seized 20 boxes of ghee mixed with animal fat. The ghee was being supplied to hotels and messes. Further investigation is being carried out by the FDA.
Bhiwandi Nizampura Municipal Corporation on Tuesday raided a closed slaughterhouse in Bhiwandi where ghee was manufactured using animal fat and seized 20 boxes containing 15 kg of ghee mixed with animal fat, officials said.
After receiving multiple complaints regarding the issue, the Environment department of BNCMC conducted a raid on a slaughterhouse on Eidgah Road in Bhiwandi that had been closed fir last few years and found that ghee was prepared using buffalo’s fat. They seized 20 boxes containing 15 kg of ghee mixed with animal fat and other equipment.
The raid was carried out by Sudam Jadhav, Environment department official, Sayara Bano, Office Superintendent, Tax collection and assessment department, and other officials of BNCMC on the instructions of BNCMC Commissioner Ajay Vaidya.
Civic officials said that they received many complaints from citizens. This ghee was supplied to hotels and messes across Bhiwandi. According to civic officials, after slaughtering buffalo, its grease was used for the ghee and is considered unhealthy for human consumption.
Ajay Vaidya, Commissioner, Bhiwandi Nizampura City Municipal Corporation said, “We have informed FDA about it and further investigation has been taken over by FDA. No case has been lodged yet. This activity was conducted on illegal encroachment at a closed slaughterhouse without any appropriate permission from the corporation. We have destroyed the ghee and other equipment and conducted the panchnama.” ghee adulteration animal fat seizure destruction alleged Bhiwandi, Thane, Maharashtra, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat ghee mixed with animal fat ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod manufacturing using animal fat ghee was manufactured using animal fat manufacturing using animal fat fflo:hasFraudType Substitution ghee was manufactured using animal fat manufacturing using animal fat fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional ghee was manufactured using animal fat animal fat fflo:foundAt Processing ghee was manufactured using animal fat ghee fflo:outputOf ghee manufacturing ghee was manufactured using animal fat ghee fflo:hasAdulterant buffalo grease grease was used for the ghee destruction of ghee and equipment fflo:issuedBy Bhiwandi Nizampura City Municipal Corporation We have destroyed the ghee and other equipment1b2:Te1a,Over 4 lakh litres seized in drive against substandard edible oil in UP theprint.in Lucknow, Feb 28 (PTI) The Uttar Pradesh Food Safety and Drug Administration (FSDA) has seized 4,16,494 litres of edible oil of suspect or substandard quality, estimated to be worth approximately Rs 6.43 crore.
FSDA has launched an inspection drive to ensure quality edible oil is available to the general public ahead of Holi and correction notices were issued to 37 manufacturing units due to deficiencies, the department said in a post on X.
The department said that 58 inter-district teams were formed and deployed on the field and 64 edible oil manufacturing units were inspected.
“Eight units were found closed during the inspection, while 56 units were found operational, against which enforcement action was taken,” the department said, and added that 206 samples of edible oil were collected for testing.
The department seized 4,16,494 litres of edible oil of suspect or substandard quality. The estimated value of the seized oil is approximately Rs 6.43 crore, the department said.
On February 25, the FSDA team seized and destroyed 9 quintals (900 kg) of contaminated khoya at Panki Railway Station in Kanpur. The khoya, brought by train, was found to be in extremely unhygienic conditions. The seized contaminated khoya was disposed of at the waste disposal plant in Govindnagar.
In Barabanki, the Food Safety Department destroyed 60 kg of khoya, 250 litres of milk, 60 kg of spices, 370 kg of kachri-papad, and 90 kg of chenna. Ten samples were sent for testing.
On February 22, in a major crackdown on food adulteration in Deoria district, FSDA team raided a mustard oil manufacturing unit. Suspected adulteration materials seized, including 400 litres of refined soybean oil found on the premises. Production was halted immediately, the department said on X.
In Lucknow, Ghaziabad, the FSDA raided an illegal tea leaf warehouse in Lucknow. The warehouse was operating without a valid license. The department seized approximately 8.5 quintals of adulterated tea leaves, the department said.
On February 23, the FSDA team took major action and seized a consignment of cheese in Ghaziabad district. About 1,200 kg of cheese worth Rs 3.84 lakh was destroyed on the spot. Three samples of cheese have been taken for testing.
On Thursday, police in Ghaziabad arrested two traders of Devendrapuri for selling counterfeit household brands. The traders identified as Sumit and Rakesh, were owner of a provision store, police said.
A complaint was filled by Lalit Kumar, an official representative of a company under Copyright Act. During raid 750 counterfeit packets of Tata salt along with 480 bottels harpic and 218 units of All Out mosquito repellants were recovered, police said, and added that the recovered items have been sealed.
“We are currently investigating the supply chain to determine where these duplicate goods are being produced,” ACP Modinagar Bhaskar Verma said. PTI NAV COR SKY SKY
This report is auto-generated from PTI news service. ThePrint holds no responsibility for its content. edible oil substandard seizure inspection correction notices suspected Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India seizure of 4,16,494 litres of edible oil fflo:issuedBy Uttar Pradesh Food Safety and Drug Administration The Uttar Pradesh Food Safety and Drug Administration (FSDA) has seized 4,16,494 litres of edible oil 206 samples of edible oil fflo:collectedAt edible oil manufacturing units 206 samples of edible oil were collected for testing FSDA seizure of cheese fflo:targets cheese seized a consignment of cheese1b3:Tade,‘Pressing’ issues: Coconut oil first in line for ‘Made in Kerala’ tag newindianexpress.com THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: It’s all about setting standards and dealing with ‘pressing’ issues. Coconut oil will be the first product to get the ‘Made in Kerala’ tag, as part of the state government’s Kerala Brand initiative to help local manufacturers garner more credibility and acceptability in the market, especially outside the state.
The Industries and Commerce Department recently released the criteria for coconut oil manufacturers to get included in the branding exercise. “The criteria were prepared after a survey of 1,000-odd manufacturers in the state. We also took note of the various registrations and certifications for oil units. Those with statutory registrations and certifications and that follow quality and ethical standards will be considered,” said a department official. “For instance, units where the workforce does not include women will not be considered,” he added.
The government is of the view that the ‘Made in Kerala’ tag will help manufacturers gain more standing. Besides the local sourcing of raw materials, units should possess FSSAI licences and valid UDYAM and GST registrations. They should be manufacturing “expressed raw grade-I coconut oil” and also possess either IS 542:2018 or AGMARK certification.
Selected units will be continuously monitored during the initial years. Units that violate the conditions, like losing statutory registration, will be removed from the programme and this would be made public.
The government accorded top priority to coconut oil given reports of unethical practices in the sector. The food safety department had found that adulterated oil was rampant in the market. Most were marketed under names similar to popular brands.
Units selected under the branding exercise can print the tagline and logo, common for all products, on their packaging. Other products to come under the branding exercise include selected categories of food products and leather footwear. The Kerala Brand certification will be initially awarded for two years or until the expiration of the required quality certifications, whichever comes first. It can be renewed. coconut oil adulteration adulterated oil suspected Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, India adulterated oil fflo:foundAt market adulterated oil was rampant in the market coconut oil fflo:compliesWith IS 542:2018 possess either IS 542:2018 or AGMARK certification coconut oil fflo:compliesWith AGMARK possess either IS 542:2018 or AGMARK certification coconut oil manufacturer fflo:compliesWith FSSAI licence units should possess FSSAI licences Kerala Brand certification fflo:appliesToFood coconut oil The government accorded top priority to coconut oil1b4:Td7b,Adulterated Ghee: Adulterated Ghee Seized in Gujarat: Beware of Duplicate Branded Ghee | Ahmedabad News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Ahmedabad: That golden dollop of clarified butter you canât have your aloo paratha without might just be laden with toxic ingredients, warns the state Food and Drugs Control Administration (FDCA), alerting citizens to duplicate branded ghee offered at cheaper rates. With winter driving up the demand for delicacies cooked in pure ghee, unscrupulous dealers have been minting money selling adulterated stocks under various brand names. 
Since September, the FDCA has seized 8,467kg of adulterated ghee worth around Rs 30 lakh in the state. FDCA officials said that customers should get suspicious if they are offered ghee dirt cheap. FDCA commissioner H G Koshia said the department carried out several raids at factories that prepare adulterated ghee in Patan, Anand, Surat, Valsad, Junagadh and Deesa and seized huge stocks of duplicate ghee sold under various brand names.
Koshia said in most cases, the ghee is found to be adulterated. âEarlier, fraudsters used to add potato and starch in ghee to lower its manufacturing cost and increase their profit. But now they add soybean oil, vegetable oil, palm oil and ghee flavour as adulterants. Many a time, the regular food-testing labs cannot detect adulteration since the chemical reagents fail to react with certain adulterants. However, the state has a high-tech lab for this purpose. If the ghee is pure, we find the cholesterol structure peaking during the tests, but if it is adulterated, both cholesterol and sitosterol structures peak.â
He said that more raids will be carried out in the coming days. ghee adulteration soybean oil vegetable oil palm oil ghee flavour potato starch seizure alleged Gujarat, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant soybean oil they add soybean oil, vegetable oil, palm oil and ghee flavour as adulterants ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable oil they add soybean oil, vegetable oil, palm oil and ghee flavour as adulterants ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil they add soybean oil, vegetable oil, palm oil and ghee flavour as adulterants ghee fflo:hasAdulterant ghee flavour they add soybean oil, vegetable oil, palm oil and ghee flavour as adulterants ghee fflo:hasAdulterant potato fraudsters used to add potato and starch in ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant starch fraudsters used to add potato and starch in ghee Adulterated Ghee Seized in Gujarat fflo:inRegion Gujarat Adulterated Ghee Seized in Gujarat seizure of adulterated ghee fflo:issuedBy Food and Drugs Control Administration FDCA has seized 8,467kg of adulterated ghee adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt Processing raids at factories that prepare adulterated ghee adulterated ghee fflo:hasAdulterant soybean oil they add soybean oil, vegetable oil, palm oil and ghee flavour as adulterants ghee adulteration finding fflo:producedBy cholesterol structure peaking test If the ghee is pure, we find the cholesterol structure peaking during the tests high-tech lab test fflo:producesIndicator sitosterol structure peaking if it is adulterated, both cholesterol and sitosterol structures peak high-tech lab test fflo:producesIndicator sitosterol structure peaking if it is adulterated, both cholesterol and sitosterol structures peak ghee purity test fflo:producesIndicator cholesterol structure peaking If the ghee is pure, we find the cholesterol structure peaking during the tests1b5:T645,Navi Mumbai: 7 booked for selling adulterated edible oil mid-day.com Navi Mumbai: 7 booked for selling adulterated edible oil
Seven people linked to an agro firm have been accused of selling adulterated edible oil. Navi Mumbai Police has filed an FIR against them.
Representative Image
The Navi Mumbai Police registered a First Information Report against seven persons for allegedly selling adulterated edible oil, stated a PTI report. The report added that the accused persons are associated with an agro firm.
According to the PTI report, a team of APMC police station raided the premises of Gautam Agro India at Vashi on September 5 and found that animal fats and other harmful substances were being mixed in palm oil which in turn was being sold as groundnut oil and safflower oil. palm oil groundnut oil safflower oil adulteration substitution animal fats harmful substances First Information Report alleged Navi Mumbai, Thane, Maharashtra, India palm oil fflo:hasAdulterant harmful substances harmful substances were being mixed in palm oil palm oil fflo:isSubstituteFor groundnut oil palm oil which in turn was being sold as groundnut oil selling adulterated edible oil prov:wasAssociatedWith Gautam Agro India accused of selling adulterated edible oil palm oil fflo:hasAdulterant animal fats animal fats ... were being mixed in palm oil mixing animal fats in palm oil prov:wasAssociatedWith Gautam Agro India found that animal fats and other harmful substances were being mixed in palm oil FIR against seven persons fflo:issuedBy Navi Mumbai Police Navi Mumbai Police has filed an FIR against them1b6:T7ce,'Spurious' food items seized at Ferozepur meritorious school tribuneindia.com Anirudh Gupta
Ferozepur, December 3
A day after 74 students of a meritorious school in Sangrur had to be hospitalised after consuming ‘substandard’ food, a team from the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) today found the glaring anomalies in material being used to prepare meals at Government Meritorious School, Hakumatwala.
The team seized several flour bags and refined oil tins, which were allegedly adulterated, besides the contractor didn’t had a valid licence from the department concerned.
Abhinav Chauhan, Food and Safety Officer, FSSAI, said the quality of food material being served to students seemed substandard. “Though we need to wait for the report, flour and oil seemed adulterated,” said Chauhan, adding that there was no upkeep of the storage area.
Chauhan said most students complained about the food being served. He said he had asked students to inform him in future and their identity would be kept confidential.
Gurbir Singh, Principal, Government Meritorious School, Hakumatwala village, said he was on a leave and food was being served as per defined norms. He said he hadn’t received any compliant from 900 students. refined oil flour adulteration unknown adulterant seizure suspected Hakumatwala, Ferozepur, Punjab, India FSSAI finding of substandard food at Government Meritorious School Hakumatwala prov:wasAttributedTo Government Meritorious School Hakumatwala found the glaring anomalies in material being used to prepare meals at Government Meritorious School, Hakumatwala refined oil fflo:hasAdulterant unknown adulterant flour and oil seemed adulterated adulterated flour and oil fflo:foundAt Government Meritorious School Hakumatwala flour and oil seemed adulterated adulteration in refined oil fflo:foundAtStep Government Meritorious School Hakumatwala found the glaring anomalies in material being used to prepare meals at Government Meritorious School1b7:T653,Artificial ghee making factory busted in Dwarka | Delhi News - Times of India indiatimes.com NEW DELHI: Police have busted a unit selling fake ghee, made in Dichau Kalan of Dwarka, which was sold using counterfeit labels of Amul, Mother Dairy, Milkfood and Naksh Dairy.
Two workers at the unit have been apprehended. 
Police have seized a considerable quantity of the material that was being sold in tetra packs with the fakelabels.
The factory owner, identified as Sumit, is untraceable.
M Harshvardhana, deputy commissioner of police (Dwarka), said, "A raid was conducted on Sunday by the district investigation unit and vigilance branch of Dwarka. One aluminium tub containing a ghee-like substance, weighing machines, a stove, and 500-ml and 1,000-ml tetra pack boxes ofwhat looked like Mother Dairy, Amul, Milkfood, NakshDairy were found." ghee adulteration counterfeit raid seizure arrest alleged Dwarka, Delhi, India Fake ghee production in Dichau Kalan prov:used ghee unit selling fake ghee, made in Dichau Kalan Fake ghee production in Dichau Kalan prov:wasAssociatedWith Sumit The factory owner, identified as Sumit, is untraceable. Counterfeit labeling fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling sold using counterfeit labels of Amul, Mother Dairy Counterfeit labeling fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling sold using counterfeit labels Fake ghee production in Dichau Kalan fflo:foundAt Dichau Kalan made in Dichau Kalan of Dwarka Fake ghee production in Dichau Kalan fflo:foundAt Dwarka Dichau Kalan of Dwarka Fake ghee production in Dichau Kalan prov:wasAssociatedWith Two workers Two workers at the unit have been apprehended.1b8:Td03,Delhi: Fake Ghee Making Factory Busted In Dwarka, Labels Of Brands Such As Patanjali, Mother Dairy, Amul Recovered india.com New Delhi: The Delhi Police has busted a factory in Dwarka that manufactured spurious ghee and sold it containers with labels of brands such as Patanjali, Mother Dairy and Amul. During the raid, “we found different items for making spurious ghee, and there were two people there, who failed to produce proper documents to run a factory”, Deputy Commissioner of Police (Dwarka) M Harsha Vardhan said.
Teams of the Dwarka police district investigation and vigilance units conducted a raid on November 19 at Dichaun Kalan, Deputy Commissioner of Police (Dwarka) M Harsha Vardhan said.
The official said during investigation, police learnt that the factory owner’s name was Sumit. He has been booked under provisions of the Copy Rights Act, Vardhan said and added that a search is underway to nab him.
Police said they recovered stickers of Patanjali, Mother Dairy, Amul and Naksha Dairy Products from the factory. “We have recovered 4,900 wrappers or stickers of different brands, 120 cartons with labels of Mother Dairy, ghee packaging containers, gas burners, vanaspati oil and several other products to make fake ghee,” Vardhan told PTI.
Earlier this month, a 53-year-old man was arrested after a fake ghee manufacturing unit was busted in Odisha’s Ganjam district. The person arrested for allegedly being involved in running it, Epari Rajeswar Patra, was arrested last year as well for illegally operating a gutkha manufacturing unit. He was out on bail, police said.
Among the items seized were over 10,000 empty pouches, three automatic ghee packing machines, labels of a branded ghee company, 91 tin of rice-bran oil, 1,500 cartons, and sealing & grinding machine, police said.
It was found that burnt engine oil, low-grade palm oil and dangerous chemicals were used in making ghee, said Superintendent of Police Saravana Vivek M said.
The packets of ghee were not only sold in Odisha but in other parts of the country as well. ghee adulteration counterfeit vanaspati oil burnt engine oil low-grade palm oil dangerous chemicals factory busted arrest alleged Dwarka, Delhi, India vanaspati oil fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee vanaspati oil and several other products to make fake ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant burnt engine oil burnt engine oil, low-grade palm oil and dangerous chemicals were used in making ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant low-grade palm oil burnt engine oil, low-grade palm oil and dangerous chemicals were used in making ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant dangerous chemicals dangerous chemicals were used in making ghee Fake Ghee Manufacturing Act in Dwarka prov:wasAssociatedWith Sumit police learnt that the factory owner's name was Sumit Fake Ghee Manufacturing Act in Dwarka prov:used ghee manufactured spurious ghee Fake Ghee Manufacturing Act in Dwarka prov:used vanaspati oil vanaspati oil and several other products to make fake ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod Fake Ghee Manufacturing manufactured spurious ghee fake ghee manufacturing prov:wasAssociatedWith Epari Rajeswar Patra a fake ghee manufacturing unit was busted in Odisha's Ganjam district fake ghee manufacturing prov:used ghee burnt engine oil, low-grade palm oil and dangerous chemicals were used in making ghee1b9:Tc7f,Fake ghee manufacturing unit busted in Delhi, packaging material of Amul, Mother Dairy, Patanjali recovered punjabnewsexpress.com Fake ghee manufacturing unit busted in Delhi, packaging material of Amul, Mother Dairy, Patanjali recovered
NEW DELHI: Delhi Police has busted a factory making artificial or counterfeit ghee and branding in the name of reputed brands of Patanjali Ghee, Mother Dairy ghee, Amul ghee and Naksh Dairy products, an official said on Friday.
Sharing the details, the official said that the DIU (Distt Investigation Unit) and Vigilance unit of Dwarka district has been entrusted with duty to conduct raids in Copyright and Trademark Cases on the complaints of the right holder companies.
"A raid was conducted on November 19, by combined teams of DIU and Vigilance branch of Dwarka at Dichaun Kalan. During the raid, one factory was found to be operating in preparation and packaging of counterfeit ghee," said the Deputy Commissioner of Police (Dwarka) M. Harsha Vardhan.
"One Aluminum tub containing ghee like substance, electronic weighing machines, burning stove, and tetra pack boxes (500 ml & 1000 ml) of Mother Dairy, Amul, Milkfood, Naksh Dairy, etc. were found along with Vanaspati ghee of different brands," said the DCP.
"At the said factory two workers namely Arjun and a minor were found present who informed that the factory is of Sumit, nephew of Umed Singh (owner of the said premises). The workers were asked about the authority letters of the respective brands, which they failed to produce," said the DCP.
A case has been registered and efforts are being made out to nab the owner of the factory, Sumit, said the DCP.
"Police have recovered 4900 wrappers for packaging of mother dairy, 120 cartoons with label of mother dairy, four litres ghee packed in Mother dairy packs, 231 empty packs of Patanjali ghee, 100 cartoons with label of Amul Ghee, 1245 tetra pack box with label of Amul ghee, 1568 inner plastic pouch of tetra pack with label of Amul ghee, 50 litres of Naksh Ghee among others," the DCP added. ghee adulteration counterfeit artificial ghee ghee like substance raid case registration alleged Dichaun Kalan, Dwarka, Delhi, India counterfeit ghee fflo:hasAdulterant artificial ghee factory making artificial or counterfeit ghee ghee like substance fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee Aluminum tub containing ghee like substance Fake ghee manufacturing unit prov:used ghee factory making artificial or counterfeit ghee Counterfeit ghee manufacturing prov:used ghee factory was found to be operating in preparation and packaging of counterfeit ghee Counterfeit packaging fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling branding in the name of reputed brands Counterfeit ghee production prov:wasAssociatedWith Fake ghee manufacturing unit factory making artificial or counterfeit ghee Counterfeit ghee manufacturing prov:wasAssociatedWith Sumit factory is of Sumit, nephew of Umed Singh Counterfeit ghee manufacturing fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling recovered 4900 wrappers for packaging of mother dairy Counterfeit ghee manufacturing prov:wasAssociatedWith Sumit factory is of Sumit, nephew of Umed Singh Case registration fflo:issuedBy Delhi Police A case has been registered1ba:T67f,11 quintals of spurious ghee seized in Malerkotla - The Tribune tribuneindia.com Sangrur: Officials of the Food Safety Department at Malerkotla have confiscated 11 quintals of adulterated desi ghee and started further investigation. “We have seized 11 quintals of adulterated desi ghee from a dairy and sent samples to laboratory for further testing,” said Divyajot Kaur, Food Safety Officer, Malerkotla. tns
Milk van overturns
Abohar: A pickup van, hired to collect milk for the Verka milk plant, overturned on Friday on the roadside in the middle of the Defence Road near Sachkhand Convent School. The injured pickup driver was admitted to the government hospital here. Doctors said that he has suffered a fracture in his hand. OC
Contractors skip summons
Abohar: Two Punjab liquor contractors, who had been summoned by the Sriganganagar police in connection with liquor smuggling cases, did not appear before cops on Thursday. The police had recently raided the offices and godown of a liquor firm at Lambi and the house of liquor contractor in Ferozepur. ghee adulteration unspecified confiscation alleged Malerkotla, Sangrur, Punjab, India confiscation of 11 quintals of adulterated desi ghee fflo:issuedBy Food Safety Department Officials of the Food Safety Department at Malerkotla have confiscated 11 quintals of adulterated desi ghee desi ghee fflo:hasAdulterant unspecified adulterant 11 quintals of adulterated desi ghee Seizure of adulterated desi ghee in Malerkotla fflo:foundAtStep dairy seized 11 quintals of adulterated desi ghee from a dairy laboratory testing fso:isPerformedOn desi ghee sample sent samples to laboratory for further testing1bb:Td1f,Nashik Fda Cracks Down On Adulterated Food Items, Oil | Nashik News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Nashik: The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) of the Nashik division has seized adulterated food items and spurious cooking oil from different parts of the district over the last 15-20 days.
The total amount of seized items is worth over Rs 20 lakh. FDA officials said that teams were formed to conduct raids in various outlets to prevent the sale of adulterated food items during Diwali.
On Tuesday, shrikhand and loose oil, worth over Rs two lakh, were confiscated by the Nashik Food and Drug Administration (FDA).
FDA officials said on Monday that they raided a food shop in the city and found boxes of shrikhand with no manufacturing or expiry date. Taking serious note of the same, the FDA officials seized shrikhand boxes weighing over 61 kg and worth over Rs 18,000. FDA food inspectors also raided an oil stockiest in Sinnar and seized 53 cans of loose soyabean oil, another 41 boxes of re-used refined soyabean oil and 28 boxes of re-used palmolein oil, collectively worth Rs1.93 lakh.
On November 1, the FDA officials raided a cold storage in Satpur and found over 10,000 kg of chilli powder worth over Rs 16 lakh and another 4,200 kg of coriander powder worth Rs 2.35 lakh, which was stored since March 2023 without any lable on packets. 
Suspecting that they could be stored for adulteration, the police seized the articles and sent the samples for further investigation to check whether they are adulterated.
On October 10, the FDA raided a house in Sinnar and found a man adulterating milk with the help of milk powder and colourless liquid. The FDA found 18 kg of dairy milk powder, 34 kg of milk powder and 170 litres of colourless liquid. With the help of these substances, the man had prepared 420 litres of cow milk, which he sold in markets. The FDA has registered a complaint against the milk seller with the Sinnar police station. loose oil shrikhand adulteration substandard seizure suspected Nashik, Maharashtra, India seizure of shrikhand and loose oil fflo:issuedBy Nashik Food and Drug Administration shrikhand and loose oil, worth over Rs two lakh, were confiscated by the Nashik Food and Drug Administration milk fflo:hasAdulterant milk powder adulterating milk with the help of milk powder milk fflo:hasAdulterant colourless liquid adulterating milk with the help of milk powder and colourless liquid milk powder fflo:isSubstituteFor milk adulterating milk with the help of milk powder seizure of adulterated food items and spurious cooking oil fflo:issuedBy Nashik Food and Drug Administration FDA of the Nashik division has seized adulterated food items and spurious cooking oil Shrikhand seizure incident fflo:foundAtStep Retail raided a food shop in the city and found boxes of shrikhand Seizure of loose soyabean oil fflo:foundAtStep Distribution raided an oil stockiest in Sinnar and seized 53 cans of loose soyabean oil re-used refined soyabean oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod reuse of oil re-used refined soyabean oil re-used palmolein oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod reuse of oil re-used palmolein oil chilli powder fflo:hasAdulterant suspected adulteration Suspecting that they could be stored for adulteration milk adulteration act prov:used milk adulterating milk with the help of milk powder and colourless liquid1bc:Ta6c,Punjab: 6,500 kg of spurious sweets, milk items seized in 10 days - The Tribune tribuneindia.com Vishav Bharti
Chandigarh, November 8
In the past 10 days, the food safety wing of Punjab’s Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has seized over 6,500 kg of khoya and sweets, which were unfit for human consumption. Around 30 per cent of these came from Haryana and Rajasthan.
As per data compiled by the FDA, between October 29 and November 7, 6,532 kg of sweets and milk products were seized across the state. The biggest seizure was 2,550 kg of spurious desi ghee in Faridkot. It was being made from refined and vanaspati oil.
1,392 kg milk cake seized from Moga
- The biggest recovery was made from Moga, where 1,392 kg of milk cake had been delivered from Jodhpur
- It was delivered at half of the actual cost. The Food and Drug Administrationhas sent the samples to a lab for testing
- In Mohali district, 670 kg of kalakand was seized, which had been procured from Haryana
The adulterated milk products making their way from the neighbouring states is also a cause for concern. Of the seized items, around 2,052 kg came from the neighbouring states. The biggest such recovery was made from Moga, where 1,392 kg of milk cake was delivered from Jodhpur. It was delivered at half of the actual cost. The FDA has sent the samples to a lab. Apart from that, in Mohali, 670 kg of kalakand was seized procured from Haryana.
Commissioner, FDA, Dr Abhinav Trikha said to control and check inter-district and inter-state supply of milk and milk products, especially khoya, early morning and late evening hour drives were also being conducted by food safety officials.
The seizure of paneer and petha were made from Amritsar, Bathinda, Muktsar and Faridkot districts.
To ensure the purity of milk, milk products and sweets amid the ongoing festival season, the FDA has collected around 1,000 samples during October only, which include 43 samples of khoya, 97 sweets, 92 of coloured sweets, 27 of paneer, 112 of coloured bakery items, 104 of dry fruits and 389 of various food items for analysis. Further legal action is being initiated against the violators as per the report of analysis received from the State Food Laboratory. ghee adulteration seizure pending_test India, Faridkot analysis fso:isPerformedAt State Food Laboratory report of analysis received from the State Food Laboratory seizure of khoya and sweets fflo:triggeredAction seizure of 6,500 kg of khoya and sweets seized over 6,500 kg of khoya and sweets desi ghee fflo:hasAdulterant refined oil made from refined and vanaspati oil desi ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vanaspati oil made from refined and vanaspati oil1bd:T7c5,3,000 kg adulterated ghee seized in Uttar Pradesh's Firozabad indiatoday.in 3,000 kg adulterated ghee seized in Uttar Pradesh's Firozabad
According to the district administration, refined vegetable oil and other chemicals were being used in the factory to make the adulterated ghee.
Ahead of the Diwali festivities, a team of district administration seized a factory manufacturingÂ adulterated ghee (clarified butter) inÂ Uttar Pradesh'sÂ Firozabad district. During the raid, 3,000 litres of adulterated ghee were recovered.
In the operation, the team also recovered empty packets and tins of many renowned ghee manufacturing brands.
Speaking about the operation,Â Assistant Commissioner of Firozabad's Food Safety and Drug Administration (FSDA) department, Sudhir Kumar, said that refined vegetable oil andÂ other chemicals were being used in the factory to make the adulterated ghee.
Kumar further added that the factory did not have the requisite license to manufacture ghee.
The people living in the neighbourhood were also not aware that adulterated ghee was being manufactured in the factory, he said.
As per the Firozabad Police, a case has been registered against the factory owner under relevant sections of the law who is currently at large. ghee adulteration refined vegetable oil chemicals seizure case registered alleged Firozabad, Uttar Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant refined vegetable oil refined vegetable oil and other chemicals were being used in the factory to make the adulterated ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant chemicals refined vegetable oil and other chemicals were being used in the factory to make the adulterated ghee ghee fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy adulterated ghee (clarified butter) Seizure of 3,000 litres of adulterated ghee fflo:inRegion Uttar Pradesh's Firozabad 3,000 kg adulterated ghee seized in Uttar Pradesh's Firozabad manufacturing adulterated ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith factory owner case has been registered against the factory owner1be:Tb41,Mumbai News: Adulterated Sweets, Edible Oil Worth ₹1.64 Lakh Seized By FDA freepressjournal.in Mumbai: Ahead of Diwali, the Food And Drug Administration (FDA) has raided three establishments in the western suburbs and seized adulterated sweets and edible oil worth ₹1,64,655. A senior official, who was part of the raiding team, said they have collected the samples of the seized materials and sent them to laboratories for testing.
Following a tip-off, the agency impounded refined sunflower oil and RBD palmolein oil worth ₹1,07,120 from Pragati Oil Mill in Sakinaka, mawa worth ₹52,270 from Brijwasi Mawawala in Borivali, and used cooking oil and RBD palmolein oil valued at ₹5,265 from Mangaldeep foods in Sakinaka. “We are also tracking mawa coming from Gujarat as most of the adulterated or spurious mawa is being exported from Gujarat through trucks, buses or trains. Last year, we had caught such consignments,” informed the official.
FDA launches an all-out inspection drive across all sweet shops
Given the trend of an increase in adulterated and substandard food materials flooding markets during the festive season, the FDA has initiated an inspection drive covering all sweets shops in Mumbai. “We had received several complaints regarding manufacturing and sale of adulterated milk products. Moreover, we got a tip-off following which three teams were deputed, who carried out raids in zones 12 and 7 of the city,” said the official.
FDA Joint Commissioner (Food) Shailesh Adhav said, “Products were seized for reasons such as label contravention and storage in unhygienic condition, and suspected to be substandard.” The drive will continue and appropriate actions will be taken against those who violate norms and regulations, he warned.
Key highlights of FDA raid
Refined sunflower oil, RBD palmolein oil worth ₹1,07,120 seized from Pragati Oil Mill in Sakinaka
Mawa worth ₹52,270 found at Brijwasi Mawawala in Borivali
Used cooking oil, RBD palmolein oil valued at ₹5,265 impounded from Mangaldeep foods in Sakinaka
Products seized for reasons such as label contravention, storage in unhygienic condition, substandard quality
Drive will continue covering all sweets shops in Mumbai sunflower oil palmolein oil used cooking oil substandard mislabeling raid seizure suspected Mumbai, Maharashtra, India Mumbai Diwali Raid prov:used sunflower oil impounded refined sunflower oil Mumbai Diwali Raid prov:used mawa mawa worth ₹52,270 from Brijwasi Mawawala refined sunflower oil fflo:foundAt Pragati Oil Mill Refined sunflower oil... seized from Pragati Oil Mill mawa fflo:foundAt Brijwasi Mawawala Mawa worth ₹52,270 found at Brijwasi Mawawala label contravention fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling Products were seized for reasons such as label contravention FDA raid fflo:targets sweets shops Drive will continue covering all sweets shops1bf:T7db,2,633kg Of Spurious Ghee Confiscated | Ahmedabad News - Times of India indiatimes.com Ahmedabad: Gujarat State Food and Drug Control Administration (FDCA) seized 2,633kg adulterated ghee worth Rs 10.34 lakh. FDCA commissioner H G Koshia said that the state government is vigilant to ensure that the citizens of the state get pure and quality essential food items during the festivals of Navratri and Diwali. 
The FDCA recently seized about 2,100kg of adulterated ghee worth Rs 7 lakh from the Jai Krishna Industries in Junagadh.
Apart from this, the administration conducted searches at the Charnamrut Dairy and the Jashnath Traders in Valsad and seized 533kg adulterated ghee worth Rs 3.34 lakh.
âA raid was carried out by the department at the Jai Krishna Industries and suspected adulterated ghee was found there. The owner, Kamlesh Sodha, does not have the licence to manufacture ghee. We found adulterated ghee in tins but no bill was produced by him,â said Koshia. 
Sodha said he had bought the ghee from Mumbai-based GPS Oil Industries without any bill. âHe used to add palmolein oil and sell under brands such as Vraj Matuki and Shree Kathiawadi Gir at Rs 250 per kg,â Koshia added.
In Umargam of Valsad district, 500kg adulterated Rang Madhur Cow Ghee being manufactured by one Mitul Dhamelia was seized. tnn ghee adulteration unclear seizure alleged Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India Umargam, Valsad, Gujarat, India seizure of 2,633kg adulterated ghee fflo:issuedBy Gujarat State Food and Drug Control Administration Gujarat State Food and Drug Control Administration (FDCA) seized 2,633kg adulterated ghee manufacture of Rang Madhur Cow Ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith Mitul Dhamelia 500kg adulterated Rang Madhur Cow Ghee being manufactured by one Mitul Dhamelia ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palmolein oil He used to add palmolein oil and sell under brands adulteration of ghee at Jai Krishna Industries prov:wasAssociatedWith Kamlesh Sodha The owner, Kamlesh Sodha, does not have the licence to manufacture ghee1c0:T15ff,Ludhiana: Out of 134 samples 25 items fail food safety test in three months hindustantimes.com Ludhiana: Out of 134 samples 25 items fail food safety test in three months
The items which were found tainted by misbranding or adulteration include staples like paneer, ghee, salt, Jaggery, and dal, according to information shared by the officials of the food safety department
Raising concern about the safety of food products available in Ludhiana, as many as 25 items out of the 134 samples collected by the food safety department failed to meet the quality benchmark set by the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) in the last three months.
The items which were found tainted by misbranding or adulteration include staples like paneer, ghee, salt, Jaggery, and dal, according to information shared by the officials of the food safety department.
“The department has intensified sampling efforts ahead of the festival season. In October, 34 samples have already been collected in Ludhiana, with results pending. A team of four food safety officers’ conduct sample collection drives across the Ludhiana to ensure that no malpractices in the food industry jeopardise the health of residents,” district health officer Dr. Ripu Daman said.
The food safety department, which routinely collects and tests food samples, classifies them into three categories: substandard, misbranded, and unsafe. Substandard and misbranded food items can lead to civil prosecution, while unsafe food items can result in criminal proceedings due to the potential health hazards they pose.
Substandard food refers to products that fail to meet the nutritional qualifications specified by FSSAI. Misbranding occurs when food packaging lacks essential information such as batch numbers, expiry dates, ingredient declarations, and nutritive values. Unsafe food items are typically adulterated with substances not permitted by FSSAI, which can have serious long-term health implications.
In July, three out of 45 samples taken by the department failed to meet standards, including misbranded cardamom, substandard jaggery, and ‘shakkar’. August saw 11 out of 46 samples failing, with three substandard samples of ‘paneer’ and curd, four misbranded salt samples, three samples of salt tainted with extraneous matter, and one unsafe ghee sample. In September, 13 out of 43 samples failed, including 11 substandard samples of curd and ‘paneer’ and two misbranded samples of ready-to-eat snacks and dal.
Urging consumers to exercise caution, food safety officer Satwinder Singh said, “Consumer must scrutinise food labels for expiry dates, ingredients, and nutritive values. One must be careful when purchasing vibrantly coloured traditional sweets, as they may contain excessive color additives. A quick and easy test can be conducted at home to detect adulterants in products, such as checking the purity of milk by placing a few drops on a clean, slanting surface. If the milk leaves a white trail, it is pure; otherwise, it may be impure. The FSSAI website offers various detecting adulterants with rapid testing (DART) methods for in food products.”
Under the Food Safety and Standards Act 2006 (FSSA), those responsible for unsafe food items can face imprisonment ranging from six months to six years and fines from ₹1 lakh to ₹5 lakh. In the tragic event of a consumer’s death, the food business operator may receive a life sentence with a fine of at least ₹10 lakh. ghee adulteration sample_collection pending_test India, Ludhiana salt fflo:hasAdulterant extraneous matter salt tainted with extraneous matter traditional sweets fflo:hasAdulterant excessive color additives vibrantly coloured traditional sweets, as they may contain excessive color additives Food Safety and Standards Act 2006 fflo:appliesToFood unsafe food items Under the Food Safety and Standards Act 2006 (FSSA), those responsible for unsafe food items Ludhiana food safety incident fflo:foundIn paneer items which were found tainted by misbranding or adulteration include staples like paneer Ludhiana food safety incident fflo:foundIn ghee items which were found tainted by misbranding or adulteration include staples like paneer, ghee Ludhiana food safety incident fflo:foundIn Jaggery items which were found tainted by misbranding or adulteration include staples like paneer, ghee, salt, Jaggery, and dal IncidentFinding_Ludhiana_25_failures fflo:foundIn dal items which were found tainted by misbranding or adulteration include staples like paneer, ghee, salt, Jaggery, and dal IncidentFinding_Ludhiana_25_failures fflo:inRegion Ludhiana 25 items out of the 134 samples collected by the food safety department failed to meet the quality benchmark set by the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) in the last three months IncidentFinding_Ludhiana_25_failures fflo:producedBy FoodSafetyTest 25 items fail food safety test cardamom fflo:hasAdulterationMethod Misbranding misbranded cardamom jaggery fflo:hasPermissibleLimit nutritional qualifications specified by FSSAI Substandard food refers to products that fail to meet the nutritional qualifications specified by FSSAI. shakkar fflo:constitutes Substandard including misbranded cardamom, substandard jaggery, and 'shakkar' substandard curd fflo:constitutes violation of nutritional qualifications Substandard food refers to products that fail to meet the nutritional qualifications specified by FSSAI salt fflo:hasAdulterationMethod Misbranding misbranded salt samples slanting surface test fflo:producesIndicator white trail If the milk leaves a white trail, it is pure1c1:T173e,â_x0080__x0098_substandard Ghee Supplied To Make Prasad In Ambajiâ_x0080__x0099_ | Vadodara News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Vadodara/Gandhinagar: A firm which was entrusted with making âmohanthal prasadâ (a sweet made from chickpea flour, sugar and ghee) for devotees of the famous Ambaji temple during the âBhadarvi Poonamâ fair, supplied substandard ghee by falsely representing it as Amul ghee. Lakhs of devotees visited the temple during the fair from September 23 to 29.
Himatnagar-based Sabarkantha District Co-operative Milk Producers Union Limited popularly known as Sabar Dairy has registered an FIR against M/s Mohini Caterers, the firm for supplying substandard ghee to the Ambaji temple in Banaskantha.
Food and Drug Control Administration commissioner H G Koshia said that 2,820 kg of substandard ghee worth Rs 8 lakh was seized from M/s Mohini Caterers on August 28. He added that 188 tins of 15 kg each were seized from the firm which was given the contract to prepare the mohanthal prasad.
Koshia told TOI that the initial on-site tests of the samples had indicated adulteration. âThe FDCA lab report confirmed the ghee to be of inferior quality and adulterated on September 15,â said Koshia. But FDCA sources add that the results were not declared and FIR was not lodged as it could have created panic among pilgrims.
âThe issue was sensitive as Ambaji temple is among 47 in the state which has received a Blissful Hygiene Offering to God (BHOG) certificate from 
FSSAI. Mohini Caterers violated the certification and trust. The caterers had bought loose ghee from Madhupura market in Ahmedabad, misbranded it as Amul ghee and supplied it to prepare prasad at the temple,â says Koshia
Banaskantha district collector Varunkumar Baranwal said, âThe entire lot of ghee whose samples had failed FDCA tests was sealed and was not used in making of mohanthal prasad. During the entire fair at the temple, good quality materials were used for preparation of mohanthal prasad.â
He added, âWe have cancelled the catererâs contract on September 30. From now on, contracts will be renewed every month. The temple authorities were preparing the prasad over the last 15 days in the presence of a government official.â
Sabar Dairy has registered the FIR against Mohini Caterers and other unidentified persons associated with the supply of substandard ghee at Ambaji police station on September 30. The complaint filed by Sabar Dairyâs officials states that the ghee tins bore Amul labels and mentioned that they were packed by Sabar Dairy.
âInvestigations revealed that the ghee tins supplied by Mohini Caterers to the temple trust bore duplicate labels of Sabar Dairy,â the police complaint states, adding that the batch numbers, tin specifications and labels on the sealed ghee tins do not conform to the quality standards set by the GCMMF.
GCMMFâs managing director Jayen Mehta on the other hand said that no dairy union affiliated to the federation is engaged in such activities. âAmul ghee available in the market is authentic and of high quality,â Mehta, said, in a statement issued on Tuesday.
Meanwhile, state Congress spokesperson Hemang Raval alleged on Tuesday that the temple trust and the state government not only have hurt the religious sentiments of lakhs of devotees, they have put the health of people in jeopardy. ghee adulteration mislabeling loose ghee FIR registered contract cancellation seizure alleged Ambaji, Banaskantha, Gujarat, India Ambaji temple fflo:compliesWith Blissful Hygiene Offering to God (BHOG) certificate Ambaji temple is among 47 in the state which has received a Blissful Hygiene Offering to God (BHOG) certificate from FSSAI Blissful Hygiene Offering to God (BHOG) certificate lkif:created_by FSSAI received a Blissful Hygiene Offering to God (BHOG) certificate from FSSAI ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod misbranding loose ghee as Amul ghee bought loose ghee from Madhupura market in Ahmedabad, misbranded it as Amul ghee GCMMF quality standards lkif:created_by GCMMF quality standards set by the GCMMF Supply of substandard ghee to Ambaji temple prov:wasAssociatedWith M/s Mohini Caterers firm for supplying substandard ghee to the Ambaji temple Supply of substandard ghee to Ambaji temple prov:used ghee supplied substandard ghee Supply of substandard ghee to Ambaji temple fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling falsely representing it as Amul ghee substandard ghee fflo:foundAt M/s Mohini Caterers seized from M/s Mohini Caterers Ghee adulteration finding fflo:supportedBy FDCA lab report The FDCA lab report confirmed the ghee to be of inferior quality Ghee adulteration finding fflo:identifies substandard ghee adulterant lab report confirmed the ghee to be of inferior quality and adulterated Ghee adulteration finding fflo:foundIn ghee lab report confirmed the ghee to be of inferior quality Ghee adulteration finding fflo:producedBy LaboratoryTest FDCA lab report confirmed ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Mohini Caterers Mohini Caterers violated the certification and trust misbranding loose ghee as Amul ghee fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling misbranded it as Amul ghee substandard ghee fflo:foundAt Ambaji temple supplied it to prepare prasad at the temple contract cancellation fflo:targets ghee We have cancelled the catererâs contract on September 30 ghee tins fflo:hasAdulterationMethod duplicate labeling ghee tins bore Amul labels and mentioned that they were packed by Sabar Dairy ghee adulteration at Ambaji temple prov:wasAssociatedWith Mohini Caterers ghee tins supplied by Mohini Caterers to the temple trust bore duplicate labels ghee tins supplied by Mohini Caterers fflo:hasAdulterationMethod Mislabeling bore duplicate labels of Sabar Dairy ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod mislabeling with duplicate labels bore duplicate labels of Sabar Dairy mislabeling with duplicate labels fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling bore duplicate labels of Sabar Dairy1c2:Tab0,Chatuhshringi police, FDA seize 650 kg of adulterated ghee, oil hindustantimes.com Chatuhshringi police, FDA seize 650 kg of adulterated ghee, oil
The police have arrested Sangram Singh Tej Singh Rajput (38), a resident of Budhwar Peth, and booked him under various sections for endangering the public by manufacturing spurious ghee and oil
PUNE: The Chatuhshringi Police in tandem with the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in a raid seized 650 kg of adulterated ghee and soybean oil from Pashan. The police received information that an illegal ghee manufacturing setup was operational in Bhagwatinagar following which the FDA and the police under the guidance of SPI Balaji Pandhare raided the premises on Tuesday and seized the material.
The police have arrested Sangram Singh Tej Singh Rajput (38), a resident of Budhwar Peth, and booked him under various sections for endangering the public by manufacturing spurious ghee and oil. Senior PI Pandhare said that the police have seized the adulterated material, and the FDA is investigating further in the case.
“During the police raid, 650 kg adulterated ghee, 135 kg oil, 105 kg dalda, 54 empty tin containers, and machinery used for packaging has been seized. All these are estimated to cost more than ₹3 lakh,” Pandhare said.
FDA authorities claimed that the administration received a large number of complaints in this regard and a special campaign will be implemented throughout the city during the festive season.
The administration appealed to the consumers to file a complaint on the toll-free number 1800-222-365 against those who cheat and sell low-quality food items.
The assistant commissioner of FDA, Pune has appealed to all the food processing units in the district to produce food items only after obtaining the required license under the Food Safety and Honors Act, 2006. The sale of adulterated material may pose a threat to the lives of citizens, the FDA added. ghee adulteration spurious ghee seizure arrest alleged Pune, Maharashtra, India manufacturing spurious ghee and oil prov:used ghee manufacturing spurious ghee and oil manufacturing spurious ghee and oil prov:used soybean oil seized 650 kg of adulterated ghee and soybean oil manufacturing spurious ghee and oil fflo:foundAt Pashan seized 650 kg of adulterated ghee and soybean oil from Pashan manufacturing spurious ghee and oil fflo:foundAt Bhagwatinagar illegal ghee manufacturing setup was operational in Bhagwatinagar food processing units fflo:compliesWith Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 produce food items only after obtaining the required license under the Food Safety and Honors Act, 2006 special campaign fflo:issuedBy FDA a special campaign will be implemented throughout the city1c3:T64d,Hyderabad: Man held for selling adulterated ghee in Secunderabad siasat.com Hyderabad: Hyderabad Police Commissioner’s Task Force on Sunday, August 20, arrested a man for allegedly selling adulterated ghee. Nearly 45 kg of adulterated ghee was recovered from his possession.
Acting on a tip-off, police team raided a store belonging to Muthu Naveen, 28, at Monda Market. According to police, Naveen would mix Dalda cooking oil with groundnut oil to prepare a combination then selling it to customers branding it as pure ghee.
“While pure ghee is priced at Rs 700 a kg in the market, he sold the adulterated combination at Rs 500 a kg, convincing that he was a wholesale dealer and cheated people,” said the Task Force officials.
Subsequently, the Commissioner’s Task Force handed over the accused to the Monda Market police station for further action. ghee adulteration Dalda cooking oil groundnut oil arrest seizure alleged Secunderabad, Hyderabad, Telangana, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant Dalda cooking oil mix Dalda cooking oil with groundnut oil to prepare a combination then selling it to customers branding it as pure ghee Adulteration of ghee in Secunderabad prov:used ghee selling adulterated ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod Mixing Dalda and groundnut oil mix Dalda cooking oil with groundnut oil to prepare a combination Mixing Dalda and groundnut oil fflo:hasFraudType Substitution selling it to customers branding it as pure ghee Mixing Dalda and groundnut oil fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional cheated people Dalda cooking oil fflo:foundAt Retail raided a store belonging to Muthu Naveen1c4:Tb6d,Five get life term in 14-year-old ghee adulteration case in UP | India News - Times of India indiatimes.com BAREILLY: In a "landmark judgment", the court of an additional district judge awarded life imprisonment to five men in a 14-year-old food adulteration case in Bareilly. Judge Arvind Kumar Yadav also imposed a fine of Rs 50,000 each on the convicts.
The accused were caught with 26 quintals of adulterated ghee (clarified butter) from a makeshift factory in the basement of a house in Subhash Nagar area of the city on October 15, 2009.
Five men - Mahesh Kumar Vaishya from Muzaffarnagar, Yogendra Lodhi, Lokman Lodhi, 
Satya Prakash and Tinni alias Subhash (all from Bareilly) - were arrested from the spot during a raid by a joint team of local police and officials of the food safety department. Two others - Rajnish Chauhan and Subhash Saxena - were held later.
All seven at the time were booked under IPC Sections 272 (adulteration of food or drink intended for sale), 273 (sale of noxious food or drink), 420 (cheating), 467 (forgery), 468 (forgery for the purpose of cheating) and 471 (using forged documents as genuine).
Additional district government counsel (ADGC) Tejpal Singh Raghav told TOI on Saturday, "This judgment has set a precedent after 
UP state amendment of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. Earlier, maximum punishment for the crime was six months. In all, seven were held but two were acquitted as there was no direct evidence against them."
The ADGC said, "The accused were found converting vegetable oil into ghee using harmful chemicals which can cause cancer. The lab report of the samples confirmed adulteration. The accused also failed to show any document of a registered firm." ghee adulteration arrest pending_test India, Bareilly, UP ghee fflo:hasAdulterant harmful chemicals converting vegetable oil into ghee using harmful chemicals harmful chemicals fflo:causesEffect cancer harmful chemicals which can cause cancer ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod converting vegetable oil into ghee converting vegetable oil into ghee using harmful chemicals vegetable oil fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee converting vegetable oil into ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod using harmful chemicals The accused were found converting vegetable oil into ghee using harmful chemicals ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Satya Prakash Five men - Mahesh Kumar Vaishya from Muzaffarnagar, Yogendra Lodhi, Lokman Lodhi, Satya Prakash and Tinni alias Subhash ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Rajnish Chauhan Two others - Rajnish Chauhan and Subhash Saxena - were held later ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Subhash Saxena Two others - Rajnish Chauhan and Subhash Saxena - were held later cancer fflo:hasEffectType fflo:ChronicEffect harmful chemicals which can cause cancer converting vegetable oil into ghee fflo:hasFraudType Substitution converting vegetable oil into ghee1c5:Td3f,Spurious Ghee Racket Busted In City, 1 Arrested | Jaipur News - Times of India indiatimes.com Jaipur: Ahead of the festive season, the city police on Sunday organised a crackdown on spurious ghee racket in two separate locations and arrested one person. Police teams confiscated over a thousand packets, tins and jars with counterfeit labels of leading dairy companies. Head constable Chandra Pal received intel regarding a large workshop on Sansar Chandra Road under the Jalupura police station area that was producing and stockpiling counterfeit ghee.
Police conducted a raid at the location and discovered 94 packets of ghee bearing logo of a prominent dairy company within the state. They also found counterfeit ghee packed in 720 packets of another well-known brand. In addition to the ghee, counterfeit stamps and seals were also recovered during the operation. During the raid, the police arrested an accused idenitfied as Vishnu Kumar. Following interrogation, the accused led the authorities to another similar operation being conducted by his brother-in-law in Chaksu.
Subsequently, police teams were dispatched to Chaksu where they seized machinery used in the production of fake ghee, packaging materials with labels of various brands, and ghee stored in various buckets.
The fake ghee was being produced using toxic chemicals that could potentially result in health problems.
"The accused is a member of a notorious gang that has been engaged in manufacturing counterfeit ghee. This gang, with the help of other criminals, is engaged in distributing fake ghee not only in Rajasthan but also in other states," stated an official.
Police said they also took the help of an expert from the cooperatives department to assess the genuineness of the ghee. The expert confirmed that the confiscated ghee was, in fact, fake.
The city police also stated that they are currently interrogating the suspect to ascertain the precise volume of fake ghee that was manufactured and subsequently sold in the market. ghee adulteration seizure pending_test Jaipur, Rajasthan, India, Jaipur, Rajasthan ghee fflo:hasAdulterant toxic chemicals fake ghee was being produced using toxic chemicals toxic chemicals fflo:causesEffect health problems toxic chemicals that could potentially result in health problems Spurious Ghee Production Act prov:wasAssociatedWith Vishnu Kumar police arrested an accused idenitfied as Vishnu Kumar Spurious Ghee Production Act prov:used ghee producing and stockpiling counterfeit ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod Counterfeit Labeling counterfeit labels of leading dairy companies Counterfeit Labeling fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling counterfeit labels of leading dairy companies Counterfeit Labeling fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional spurious ghee racket Counterfeit Ghee prov:wasGeneratedBy Spurious Ghee Production Act producing and stockpiling counterfeit ghee Fake Ghee fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee counterfeit ghee Fake Ghee fflo:foundAt Sansar Chandra Road Workshop discovered 94 packets of ghee bearing logo Fake ghee distribution finding fflo:foundAtStep Distribution engaged in distributing fake ghee fake ghee fflo:foundAt other states distributing fake ghee not only in Rajasthan but also in other states expert from the cooperatives department prov:wasAttributedTo confiscated ghee was fake The expert confirmed that the confiscated ghee was, in fact, fake.1c6:Taaa,Five get life term for adulterating ghee in 2009 | Bareilly News - Times of India indiatimes.com BAREILLY: In a "landmark judgement", the court of an additional district judge awarded life imprisonment to five men in a 14-year-old food adulteration case in Bareilly. Judge Arvind Kumar Yadav also imposed a fine of Rs 50,000 each on the convicts.
The accused were caught with 26 quintals of adulterated ghee (clarified butter) from a makeshift factory in the basement of a house in Subhash Nagar area of the city on October 15, 2009.
Five men -- Mahesh Kumar Vaishya from Muzaffarnagar, Yogendra Lodhi, Lokman Lodhi, 
Satya Prakash and Tinni alias Subhash (all from Bareilly) -- were arrested from the spot during a raid conducted by a joint team of local police and officials of the food safety department. Two others -- Rajnish Chauhan and Subhash Saxena -- were held later.
All seven at that time were booked under IPC sections 272 (adulteration of food or drink intended for sale), 273 (sale of noxious food or drink), 420 (cheating), 467 (forgery), 468 (forgery for the purpose of cheating) and 471 (using forged documents as genuine).
Additional district government counsel (ADGC) Tejpal Singh Raghav told TOI on Saturday, "This judgement has set a precedent as five accused were handed life term under IPC section 272 after UP state amendment of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. Earlier, maximum punishment for the crime was six months. In all, 7 accused were held but two of them were acquitted as there was no direct evidence against them."
The ADGC added, "The accused were found converting vegetable oil into ghee using harmful chemicals which can cause cancer. They were present in the court when the judgement was pronounced and sent to Bareilly district jail." ghee adulteration arrest pending_test India, Bareilly vegetable oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod converting vegetable oil into ghee using harmful chemicals accused were found converting vegetable oil into ghee using harmful chemicals harmful chemicals fflo:causesEffect cancer using harmful chemicals which can cause cancer Ghee Adulteration Act 2009 prov:wasAssociatedWith Rajnish Chauhan Two others -- Rajnish Chauhan and Subhash Saxena -- were held later Ghee Adulteration Act 2009 prov:wasAssociatedWith Subhash Saxena Two others -- Rajnish Chauhan and Subhash Saxena -- were held later cancer fflo:hasEffectType fflo:ChronicEffect harmful chemicals which can cause cancer converting vegetable oil into ghee using harmful chemicals fflo:hasFraudType Substitution converting vegetable oil into ghee converting vegetable oil into ghee using harmful chemicals fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional accused were found converting vegetable oil into ghee1c7:Td37,Adani Wilmar files FIR against sale of counterfeit ‘Fortune’ products by Jumbotail financialexpress.com FMCG major Adani Wilmar has filed a police complaint against B2B platform Jumbotail Pvt. Ltd for allegedly distributing counterfeit ‘Fortune’ products. Acting upon this complaint, the law enforcement authorities immediately conducted a raid at the B2B platform’s warehouse, and found ‘alarming quantities of counterfeit products bearing the Adani Wilmar brand name’, it said in a statement. The seized products included 126 pet bottles of Fortune Kacchi Ghani Mustard Oil (1 litre packs) without the lid, 37 fake Fortune Refined Soybean Oil (1 litre pouches), and 16 pet bottles of Fortune Sarso Oil (1 litre packs).
Adani Wilmar has lodged the FIR at Badalpur police station in Gautam Budhnagar District, Uttar Pradesh. “At Adani Wilmar, consumer trust and product integrity are paramount. We are deeply concerned about counterfeit products circulating in the market and posing risks to consumers’ health. Taking this matter seriously, we are collaborating with authorities to swiftly identify sources of counterfeits, and take decisive actions against unscrupulous traders. We are committed to offering patrons with high-quality, authentic, and pure products. We will continue to engage in stringent measures to safeguard consumers’ interests and maintain integrity of the brand,” an Adani Wilmar spokesperson said.
The company discovered the malpractice during a routine market survey when a trader raised concerns about discrepancies in the product packaging after making a purchase from B2B online platform Jumbotail. It said that an in-depth examination of the reported products revealed significant mismatches in Batch Code details, fake QR codes, and different packaging materials, confirming the presence of counterfeit products.
Earlier this month, Adani Wilmar had said that its first quarter sales had slumped 15 per cent as a sharp fall in edible prices eclipsed strong demand for its food products. Since last year, edible oil prices have been on decline, hit by lower consumer demand in developed economies, easing of supply in the Black Sea region and strong production of oilseeds. However, it stated that the sales in its food and fast moving consumer goods segment was up 30 per cent on strong demand even as overall sales was dragged by a 15 per cent decline. mustard oil soybean oil counterfeit raid FIR filed alleged Gautam Budhnagar, Uttar Pradesh, India in-depth examination fflo:producesIndicator different packaging materials in-depth examination of the reported products revealed significant mismatches in Batch Code details, fake QR codes, and different packaging materials counterfeit products discovery prov:wasAttributedTo Adani Wilmar The company discovered the malpractice during a routine market survey counterfeit products discovery fflo:producedBy routine market survey discovered the malpractice during a routine market survey counterfeit products discovery fflo:producedBy in-depth examination in-depth examination of the reported products revealed significant mismatches counterfeit products discovery fflo:producedBy in-depth examination in-depth examination of the reported products revealed significant mismatches counterfeit products discovery fflo:foundAtStep Jumbotail purchase from B2B online platform Jumbotail1c8:T9a3,Adani Wilmar Files Police Complaint Against Sale Of Counterfeit Fortune Brand Products freepressjournal.in Edible oil major Adani Wilmar Ltd on Saturday said it has lodged a police complaint against a B2B platform for allegedly distributing counterfeit products in the name of its 'Fortune' brand.
As part of a routine market survey, Adani Wilmar representatives discovered the malpractice.
In a statement, the company said it has lodged an FIR through their agency, against the B2B platform for alleged distribution of counterfeit products on the platform.
The FIR has been lodged at Badalpur police station in Gautam Budhnagar District, Uttar Pradesh.
Adani Wilmar said the law enforcement authorities conducted a raid at the warehouse of B2B (business to business) platform "wherein alarming quantities of counterfeit products bearing the 'Fortune' brand name, the flagship brand of Adani Wilmar were seized." The seized products included 126 pet bottles of Fortune Kacchi Ghani Mustard Oil (1 litre pack) without the lid, 37 fake Fortune Refined Soybean Oil (1 litre pouches), and 16 pet bottles of Fortune Sarso Oil (1 litre packs).
"We are deeply concerned about counterfeit products circulating in the market and posing risks to consumers' health," an Adani Wilmar spokesperson said.
Taking this matter seriously, the spokesperson said the company is collaborating with authorities to swiftly identify sources of counterfeits, and take decisive actions against unscrupulous traders.
According to the statement, the company initiated an in-depth examination of the reported product, which revealed significant mismatches in Batch Code details, fake QR codes, and different packaging materials, confirming the presence of counterfeit products. Fortune Kacchi Ghani Mustard Oil Fortune Refined Soybean Oil Fortune Sarso Oil counterfeit FIR lodged raid alleged Badalpur, Gautam Budhnagar District, Uttar Pradesh, India Counterfeit Fortune Brand Distribution Act prov:used Fortune Refined Soybean Oil fake Fortune Refined Soybean Oil Counterfeit Fortune Brand Distribution Act prov:used Fortune Sarso Oil 16 pet bottles of Fortune Sarso Oil Counterfeit Fortune Brand Seizure fflo:inRegion Gautam Budhnagar District, Uttar Pradesh FIR has been lodged at Badalpur police station in Gautam Budhnagar District, Uttar Pradesh Counterfeit Fortune Brand Distribution Method fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling distributing counterfeit products in the name of its 'Fortune' brand1c9:T912,Adani Wilmar files police complaint against sale of counterfeit Fortune brand products indiatimes.com NEW DELHI: Edible oil major Adani Wilmar Ltd on Saturday said it has lodged a police complaint against a B2B platform for allegedly distributing counterfeit products in the name of its '
Fortune' brand. As part of a routine market survey, Adani Wilmar representatives discovered the malpractice. 
In a statement, the company said it has lodged an FIR through their agency, against the B2B platform for alleged distribution of counterfeit products on the platform. 
The FIR has been lodged at Badalpur police station in Gautam Budhnagar District, 
Uttar Pradesh. 
Adani Wilmar said the law enforcement authorities conducted a raid at the warehouse of B2B (business to business) platform "wherein alarming quantities of counterfeit products bearing the 'Fortune' brand name, the flagship brand of Adani Wilmar were seized." 
The seized products included 126 pet bottles of Fortune Kacchi Ghani Mustard Oil (1 litre pack) without the lid, 37 fake Fortune Refined Soybean Oil (1 litre pouches), and 16 pet bottles of Fortune Sarso Oil (1 litre packs). 
"We are deeply concerned about counterfeit products circulating in the market and posing risks to consumers' health," an Adani Wilmar spokesperson said. 
Taking this matter seriously, the spokesperson said the company is collaborating with authorities to swiftly identify sources of counterfeits, and take decisive actions against unscrupulous traders. 
According to the statement, the company initiated an in-depth examination of the reported product, which revealed significant mismatches in Batch Code details, fake QR codes, and different packaging materials, confirming the presence of counterfeit products. Fortune Kacchi Ghani Mustard Oil Fortune Refined Soybean Oil Fortune Sarso Oil counterfeit FIR lodged raid alleged Gautam Budhnagar, Uttar Pradesh, India Counterfeit Fortune Oil Distribution Act prov:used Fortune Kacchi Ghani Mustard Oil counterfeit products bearing the 'Fortune' brand name Counterfeit Fortune Oil Distribution Act prov:used Fortune Refined Soybean Oil fake Fortune Refined Soybean Oil counterfeit products fflo:producedBy in-depth examination initiated an in-depth examination of the reported product, which revealed significant mismatches1ca:T70c,Ujjain: Adulterated ghee seized from Unhel firm freepressjournal.in Ujjain (Madhya Pradesh): Food Safety Administration along with Nagda SDM and Unhel police station on Tuesday reached the vacant house in front of a shop located in Bada Bazaar in Unhel for investigation. A total of 3,680.6 kg ghee has been seized. The vacant house belongs to Omprakash Jain Mawawale. His son Ashwin and other relatives were present on the occasion who said that Omprakash had gone to Indore. Ashwin opened the lock and checked inside. In the investigation, a total of 2,775 kg of ghee was found in 185 tins of 15 kg each, plastic tank, drum and iron tank.
On the arrival of Omprakash, more ghee packets were seized. A total of 905.66 kg of ghee was found in 23 containers which were sent to the State Food Laboratory, Bhopal for detailed examination. Meanwhile, collector Kumar Purushottam has directed to send a proposal to suspend food safety officer Mahendra Verma, working in-charge of Unhel-Nagda, as no action was taken by him on adulterated milk, mawa and ghee in his area. Ashwin Jain was also booked under NAS in the year 2020 after he was caught for making adulterated ghee. The person has continuously been committing the crime. The food safety officer will get the boot for not keeping a watch on such person, an official release said. ghee adulteration seizure proposal to suspend food safety officer alleged Unhel, Ujjain, Madhya Pradesh, India detailed examination fso:isPerformedAt State Food Laboratory, Bhopal sent to the State Food Laboratory, Bhopal for detailed examination ghee fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy Adulterated ghee seized 2020 ghee adulteration finding prov:wasAttributedTo Ashwin Jain Ashwin Jain was also booked under NAS in the year 2020 after he was caught for making adulterated ghee1cb:T8ae,Madhya Pradesh: Adulterated khoya, ghee seized from Unhel Dairy Farm freepressjournal.in Unhel (Madhya Pradesh): Food Safety officials raided a dairy farm at Unhel town of Ujjain on Tuesday night. The team seized adulterated khoya from the dairy.
Acting on a tip-off on spurious milk-based products, food safety team conducted a raid at Maa Bhawani Dairy Farm on Pagaria Stand in Unhel town. Team found that khoya was being manufactured by adding artificial flavors and vanaspati ghee.
On account of adulteration and sub-standard operations, team seized 231 kg tainted mawa, 17.6 litres vanaspati ghee and 10.58 kg cream from the spot, samples to be sent to state level food laboratory for testing
Food Safety Officer B D Sharma said that the action was taken following orders of Collector Kumar Purushottam. The license of dairy farm belonged to Rambabu Lavariya who was involved in food adulteration for long time.
Legal action would be taken against farm owner. Consumption of adulterated khoya and ghee could lead to fatal diseases. Raids were intensified in view of the wedding season. Stern action would be taken against dairy owners and shopkeepers found selling adulterated food items, he added. khoya vanaspati ghee adulteration artificial flavors vanaspati ghee seizure legal action alleged Unhel, Ujjain, Madhya Pradesh, India khoya fflo:hasAdulterant artificial flavors khoya was being manufactured by adding artificial flavors khoya fflo:hasAdulterant vanaspati ghee khoya was being manufactured by adding artificial flavors and vanaspati ghee khoya fflo:hasAdulterant artificial flavors khoya was being manufactured by adding artificial flavors Seizure of adulterated khoya and ghee at Unhel fflo:inRegion Madhya Pradesh Madhya Pradesh: Adulterated khoya, ghee seized from Unhel Dairy Farm Adulteration of khoya at Unhel prov:wasAssociatedWith Maa Bhawani Dairy Farm khoya was being manufactured by adding artificial flavors and vanaspati ghee Adulteration of khoya at Unhel prov:used khoya khoya was being manufactured by adding artificial flavors Adulteration of khoya at Unhel prov:wasAssociatedWith Rambabu Lavariya license of dairy farm belonged to Rambabu Lavariya who was involved in food adulteration1cc:T74c,Spurious ghee packets seized in Ambala City - The Tribune tribuneindia.com Ambala, March 9
A team of the CM’s flying squad has recovered 630 packets of spurious ghee of different brands from a vehicle in Ambala City.
Sources said acting on a tip-off, a team of the CM’s flying squad stopped a vehicle near Agarsen chowk and recovered the stock.
Ambala City SHO Ram Kumar said they had received a complaint from a representative of Nova, a ghee company, that their brand name was being misused by some people on packets of ghee and these are being sold in the market.
The police said with the help of the CM’s flying squad, a vehicle carrying spurious ghee products was stopped and during checking, 630 ghee packets of different brands, including Nova, Patanjali, Ramdev and Madhu, were recovered. The vehicle was on its way from Kaithal to Ambala.
The police have apprehended the vehicle driver. A case was being registered, the police said. ghee mislabeling seizure recall_triggered India, Ambala City brand misuse on ghee packets fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling brand name was being misused by some people on packets of ghee ghee fflo:foundAtStep Distribution vehicle carrying spurious ghee products was stopped Nova brand misuse incident prov:wasAttributedTo Nova complaint from a representative of Nova, a ghee company IncidentFinding_Nova_Misuse fflo:foundIn ghee brand name was being misused by some people on packets of ghee IncidentFinding_Nova_Misuse fflo:triggeredAction RegulatoryAction_Case_Registration A case was being registered, the police said Spurious Ghee Adulteration Act prov:wasAssociatedWith vehicle driver The police have apprehended the vehicle driver AdulterationAct_Spurious_Ghee prov:used ghee recovered 630 packets of spurious ghee Spurious_Ghee_Seizure fflo:foundAtStep Distribution vehicle carrying spurious ghee products was stopped1cd:T73b,Food Dept Seizes 831l Mustard Oil | Kanpur News - Times of India indiatimes.com Kanpur: Food security and drug administration department on Sunday seized around 831 litre of mustard oil worth Rs 1,14,764 and collected 19 samples of food items and sent them to lab for testing.
The mustard oil was seized from three vendors, and the biggest stock was of a trader in Ghatampur town. The team, led by Ratnakar Singh, food security officer, seized around 799 litre of mustard oil worth Rs 1,11,860.
Another seizure of 22 litre worth Rs 2,904 from a shopkeeper of Maharajpur. 
The team, led by Shantanu Kumar, food security officer, also seized around 34 litre of refined soyabean oil worth Rs 4,420 from the same premises.
According to assistant commissioner 
Vijay Kumar, around 15 teams after roaming in the district collected 19 samples of cheese, mawa, papad, besan, maida, rice bran oil, mixed milk and sweets from 4 vendors.
Singh said raids were conducted in compliance with the orders of commissioner, food security and drug administration to provide pure and standard food items and articles on the occasion of the coming 
Holi festival. mustard oil soyabean oil substandard adulteration Seizure of 799 litre mustard oil Seizure of 34 litre refined soyabean oil suspected Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India Seizure of 799 litre mustard oil fflo:targets mustard oil seized around 799 litre of mustard oil Seizure of 34 litre refined soyabean oil fflo:targets refined soyabean oil seized around 34 litre of refined soyabean oil Lab testing for food items fso:isPerformedOn 19 samples of food items collected 19 samples of food items and sent them to lab for testing Seizure of 831l Mustard Oil fflo:issuedBy Food security and drug administration department Food security and drug administration department on Sunday seized around 831 litre of mustard oil1ce:T76c,Madhya Pradesh: Man held for selling adulterated ghee freepressjournal.in Jabalpur (Madhya Pradesh): A man selling adulterated ghee was arrested and over 22 kg of ghee, 25 litres of soy bean oil, a huge quantity of scent and an electronic balance were confiscated from his house, the police said on Friday. According to police station in-charge of Vijay Nagar police station, Sandeepika Thakur, said the crime branch had received information that a man Vedprakash Gupta was selling adulterated ghee near Bachpan School on Lamti road. The food safety officer, Pankaj Shrivastava, was also informed about it.
Shrivastava rushed to spot with his team which, along with the police, raided the house of Gupta. They laid their hands on adulterate ghee and various other items, including scent which was mixed with adulterated ghee. The 34-year-old Gupta has been selling sub-standard ghee for a long time. A case has been registered against. The police took the action following instructions from superintendent of police Siddharth Bahuguna that action should be taken against those who are selling adulterated food stuff. ghee adulteration scent arrest confiscation case_registered alleged Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh, India Selling adulterated ghee by Vedprakash Gupta prov:wasAssociatedWith Vedprakash Gupta man Vedprakash Gupta was selling adulterated ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant scent scent which was mixed with adulterated ghee Adulteration of ghee by Vedprakash Gupta prov:used ghee selling adulterated ghee Adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt Retail selling adulterated ghee near Bachpan School Siddharth Bahuguna prov:wasAssociatedWith Regulatory action against Vedprakash Gupta instructions from superintendent of police Siddharth Bahuguna that action should be taken Regulatory action against Vedprakash Gupta fflo:targets ghee action should be taken against those who are selling adulterated food stuff1cf:Tb61,Adulterated milk products seized by food safety team hindustantimes.com Adulterated milk products seized by food safety team
During the inspection at the Baba Meera Ji Enterprises, the team discovered a large number of adulterated food products, including approximately 8 quintals of adulterated cheese and 40 quintals of fake milk
: A team of food safety officials on Wednesday seized a large number of adulterated milk products, including 40 quintals of fake milk, during an inspection of a private facility located at the Phullanwal area here.
During the inspection at the Baba Meera Ji Enterprises, the team discovered a large number of adulterated food products, including approximately 8 quintals of adulterated cheese, 40 quintals of fake milk, one quintal of adulterated desi ghee, around 35 quintals of skimmed milk powder, three quintals of packaged and 50 kg of loose palm oil, as well as various other adulterants.
The team, led by Dr. Gurpreet Singh, also found various empty packets of refined oil. A furnace and motor used for mixing on the premises was also recovered. Samples of cheese, milk, refined oil and skimmed milk powder were taken and the entire stock was seized by food safety officers Tarun Bansal and Divyajot Kaur. ghee adulteration ghee seizure alleged India Adulteration of milk products at Baba Meera Ji Enterprises prov:wasAssociatedWith Baba Meera Ji Enterprises inspection at the Baba Meera Ji Enterprises, the team discovered a large number of adulterated food products Adulteration of milk products at Baba Meera Ji Enterprises prov:used desi ghee During the inspection at the Baba Meera Ji Enterprises, the team discovered a large number of adulterated food products, including approximately 8 quintals of adulterated cheese and 40 quintals of fake milk : A team of food safety officials on Wednesday seized a large number of adulterated milk products, including 40 quintals of fake milk, during an inspection of a private facility located at the Phullanwal area here. During the inspection at the Baba Meera Ji Enterprises, the team discovered a large number of adulterated food products, including approximately 8 quintals of adulterated cheese, 40 quintals of fake milk, one quintal of adulterated desi ghee, around 35 quintals of skimmed milk powder, three quintals of packaged and 50 kg of loose palm oil, as well as various other adulterants. The team, led by Dr. Gurpreet Singh, also found various empty packets of refined oil. A furnace and motor used for mixing on the premises was also recovered. Samples of cheese, milk, refined oil and skimmed milk powder were taken and the entire stock was seized by food safety officers Tarun Bansal and Divyajot Kaur. Adulteration of milk products at Baba Meera Ji Enterprises prov:used milk 40 quintals of fake milk Adulteration of milk products at Baba Meera Ji Enterprises prov:used cheese 8 quintals of adulterated cheese1d0:T654,Bhopal: Lose oil sale; FDA suspends mills’ licence freepressjournal.in Bhopal (Madhya Pradesh): Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) Department, which had conducted a raid at Shankar Oil Mills located in Azad Market on Friday, has suspended the latter’s licence. The order to suspend licence was issued on Saturday. Joint Collector and FDA officer Sanjay Shrivastava passed the order.
FDA team had seized 40 tons of soybean-palmolein oil, according to FDA officials. The FDA team inspected Shankar Oil Mills on Friday afternoon. Its management was found selling loose soybean and palmolein oil, which is prohibited under Food Safety and Standards Act.
The team said that around 30 tons of soybean oil and 10 tons of palm oil were found at the spot, which had been confiscated.
Whether the oil was adulterated would also be investigated. In the investigation so far, unpacked oil was sold, which is against the norms as per Food Safety and Standards Act.
The FDA officer Sanjay Shrivastava said, “Other companies involved in the same work will be investigated. After the raid, people involved in selling unpacked oil are alerted and most of them are on radar of investigation team.” soybean oil palmolein oil mislabeling substandard suspension of licence suspected Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh, India selling loose soybean and palmolein oil fflo:constitutes violation of Food Safety and Standards Act selling loose soybean and palmolein oil, which is prohibited under Food Safety and Standards Act suspension of licence fflo:issuedBy Sanjay Shrivastava Joint Collector and FDA officer Sanjay Shrivastava passed the order1d1:T1395,Argemone poisoning claims life in Jawalamukhi, alert sounded in HP’s Kangra hindustantimes.com Argemone poisoning claims life in Jawalamukhi, alert sounded in HP’s Kangra
The victims had bought the mustard from a local market in Khudian. It is learnt that the wholesaler is based at Paragpur area and it is possible that contaminated mustard seeds may have been sold in other areas as well.
After argemone poisoning, also known as epidemic dropsy, claimed a man’s life in Khundian of Jawalamukhi, an alert was sounded in Kangra district on Friday.
Three other family members of the victim, Vijay Kumar, are also being treated for epidemic dropsy, which is caused after one consumes edible oils contaminated with Argemone mexicana (Mexican prickly poppy), a weed that wildly grows in most parts of the country. Its seeds resemble those of mustard.
Kangra deputy commissioner Nipun Jindal has cautioned people against buying mustard seeds from the open market and using oil extracted from it. “Anyone who has bought mustard from the open market in recent days should not use it or oil extracted from it for their own safety,” said Jindal.
The victims had bought the mustard from a local market in Khudian. It is learnt that the wholesaler is based at Paragpur area and it is possible that contaminated mustard seeds may have been sold in other areas as well.
Meanwhile, Kangra chief medical officer Dr Gurdarshan Gupta said that preliminary investigation suggests that the affected family bought the mustard seeds in August and got its oil extracted in a local mill.
The affected family, after consuming the oil, suffered diarrhoea, vomiting and swelling and redness on parts of their body. “They sought treatment in different hospitals, including the Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research (PGIMER). However, one of the patients succumbed to the disease,”said Dr Gupta.
The family stopped consuming the oil when other members of the family developed similar symptoms, which helped the doctors diagnose the disease. The oil samples have been sent to the lab for further confirmation, he said.
Know the disease
Epidemic dropsy is caused due to the consumption of edible oils adulterated with Argemone mexicana (Mexican prickly poppy). Two major toxic alkaloids – sanguinarine and dehydrosanguinarine – found in the oil cause widespread capillary dilatation, proliferation and increased capillary permeability.
Symptoms
The illness begins with gastroenteric symptoms, followed by cutaneous erythema (redness of the skin) and pigmentation. Other symptoms are bilateral swelling of the legs, often associated with erythema, diarrhoea, dyspnoea, and glaucoma.
Persons of all ages and sexes can be affected, except breastfed infants.
Previous outbreaks
Epidemic dropsy was first reported in Calcutta in 1877. Since then, outbreaks have been reported in several states, primarily in north India.
The 1998 epidemic in New Delhi was the largest outbreak, in which over 60 persons lost their lives and more than 3,000 victims were hospitalised. The last outbreak was reported in a Punjab-based family in 2014. mustard oil adulteration contamination Argemone mexicana public alert suspected Jawalamukhi, Kangra, Himachal Pradesh, India Argemone mexicana fflo:causesEffect epidemic dropsy epidemic dropsy, which is caused after one consumes edible oils contaminated with Argemone mexicana Argemone mexicana fflo:causesEffect Epidemic dropsy Epidemic dropsy is caused due to the consumption of edible oils adulterated with Argemone mexicana dehydrosanguinarine fflo:causesEffect widespread capillary dilatation sanguinarine and dehydrosanguinarine – found in the oil cause widespread capillary dilatation Argemone mexicana fflo:isSubstituteFor mustard seeds Its seeds resemble those of mustard mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant Argemone mexicana edible oils contaminated with Argemone mexicana Argemone mexicana fflo:commonIn India weed that wildly grows in most parts of the country Argemone mexicana fflo:foundAt fflo:Distribution contaminated mustard seeds may have been sold in other areas mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant Argemone mexicana edible oils adulterated with Argemone mexicana mustard oil fflo:outputOf local mill got its oil extracted in a local mill mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod Adulteration with Argemone seeds edible oils adulterated with Argemone mexicana Epidemic dropsy fflo:hasEffectType AcuteEffect suffered diarrhoea, vomiting and swelling mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant Argemone mexicana Epidemic dropsy is caused due to the consumption of edible oils adulterated with Argemone mexicana Epidemic dropsy fflo:causesEffect gastroenteric symptoms The illness begins with gastroenteric symptoms Epidemic dropsy fflo:commonIn north India outbreaks have been reported ... primarily in north India Epidemic dropsy fflo:commonIn Calcutta first reported in Calcutta in 1877 1998 New Delhi epidemic dropsy outbreak fflo:inRegion New Delhi The 1998 epidemic in New Delhi1d2:Taa2,Govt Cracks Down On Sale Of Adulterated Coconut Oil | Thiruvananthapuram News - Times of India indiatimes.com Thiruvananthapuram: The food safety department has launched a special drive across the state as part of its crackdown on adulterated coconut oil. Named Operation Oil, searches have been conducted in as many as 100 locations across the state, health and family welfare minister Veena George said.
The minister said that the manufacturers of products found to be adulterated or not meeting the standards have been served notices and have also been fined.
The minister added that the searches will continue in the coming days as well.
The minister said that all the manufacturers should mandatorily obtain brand registration for their products. One manufacturer can come up with only one brand of coconut oil in the state. This will be strictly enforced as part of efforts to curb the sale of adulterated coconut oil. The food safety department will also examine if sulphur is being mixed with the oil.
The minister said that the food safety department is conducting various initiatives to ensure sale of safe and clean food. As part of the campaign âNalla Bhakshanam Nadinte Avakashamâ, multiple programs like operation shawarma, operation Matsya, operation jaggery etc were conducted. Since October, as many as 4,905 searches have been conducted under these programmes. As many as 651 samples have been collected and notices have been served and fines have been slapped on 294 institutions.
The minister said that the state government has come up with detailed guidelines on shawarma preparation. The state food safety department has come at the second spot in the food safety index of the 
Food Safety and Standards Authority of India. coconut oil adulteration substandard sulphur Operation Oil notices fines suspected Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, India Operation Oil fflo:targets coconut oil crackdown on adulterated coconut oil. Named Operation Oil Operation Oil fflo:issuedBy food safety department The food safety department has launched a special drive across the state as part of its crackdown on adulterated coconut oil. Named Operation Oil state food safety department SCHEMA_MISMATCH ranked second in food safety index state food safety department has come at the second spot in the food safety index Operation Oil fflo:issuedBy food safety department The food safety department has launched a special drive... Named Operation Oil notices served on 294 institutions fflo:issuedBy state food safety department notices have been served and fines have been slapped on 294 institutions fines slapped on 294 institutions fflo:issuedBy state food safety department fines have been slapped on 294 institutions1d3:T811,Thane: Adulteration detected in 27% cooking oil from 4 firms by FDA freepressjournal.in At least 27 per cent of the 56 samples of cooking oil and other food items collected from four companies in Maharashtra's Thane district have been found adulterated or with false claims, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) officials said.
The FDA's (Foods) Joint Commissioner, S R Kekre, said the samples tested revealed that palmolein oil was mixed in products sold as sunflower and soyabean oils, rice bran oil was mixed in a product sold as mustard oil and vegetable oil was mixed in products claimed to be milk cream and ghee.
Based on complaints, the FDA had carried out raids and inspected the four units located in Dahisar Mori, Bhiwandi, Kalher and Koparkhairne areas of the district, it said in a release.
Kekre asked customers to be cautious while purchasing these items.
The FDA was in the process of verifying as to whom the wholesalers and manufacturers had sold these adulterated products, he said.
Kekre also appealed to the citizens to contact the FDA if they find any substandard or adulterated goods in markets. ghee adulteration adulteration detected pending_test India, Thane district palmolein oil fflo:isSubstituteFor sunflower oil palmolein oil was mixed in products sold as sunflower palmolein oil fflo:isSubstituteFor soyabean oil palmolein oil was mixed in products sold as sunflower and soyabean oils rice bran oil fflo:isSubstituteFor mustard oil rice bran oil was mixed in a product sold as mustard oil vegetable oil fflo:isSubstituteFor milk cream vegetable oil was mixed in products claimed to be milk cream vegetable oil fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee vegetable oil was mixed in products claimed to be milk cream and ghee sunflower oil fflo:hasAdulterant palmolein oil palmolein oil was mixed in products sold as sunflower mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant rice bran oil rice bran oil was mixed in a product sold as mustard oil adulteration detection in Thane fflo:inRegion Thane district collected from four companies in Maharashtra's Thane district1d4:T87e,Thane: 27 per cent samples of edible oil, other food items from four firms found adulterated, says FDA mid-day.com Thane: 27 per cent samples of edible oil, other food items from four firms found adulterated, says FDA
The samples tested revealed that palmolein oil was mixed in products sold as sunflower and soyabean oils, rice bran oil was mixed in a product sold as mustard oil and vegetable oil was mixed in products claimed to be milk cream and ghee
Representative Image
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) officials on Thursday said that at least 27 per cent of the 56 samples of cooking oil and other food items collected from four companies in Maharashtra's Thane district have been found adulterated or with false claims.
The samples tested revealed that palmolein oil was mixed in products sold as sunflower and soyabean oils, rice bran oil was mixed in a product sold as mustard oil and vegetable oil was mixed in products claimed to be milk cream and ghee, FDA's (Foods) Joint Commissioner, S R Kekre, told PTI. ghee adulteration adulteration recall_triggered India, Thane district palmolein oil fflo:isSubstituteFor sunflower oil palmolein oil was mixed in products sold as sunflower palmolein oil fflo:isSubstituteFor soyabean oil palmolein oil was mixed in products sold as sunflower and soyabean oils rice bran oil fflo:isSubstituteFor mustard oil rice bran oil was mixed in a product sold as mustard oil vegetable oil fflo:isSubstituteFor milk cream vegetable oil was mixed in products claimed to be milk cream vegetable oil fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee vegetable oil was mixed in products claimed to be milk cream and ghee sunflower oil fflo:hasAdulterant palmolein oil palmolein oil was mixed in products sold as sunflower soyabean oil fflo:hasAdulterant palmolein oil palmolein oil was mixed in products sold as sunflower and soyabean oils mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant rice bran oil rice bran oil was mixed in a product sold as mustard oil milk cream fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable oil vegetable oil was mixed in products claimed to be milk cream ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable oil vegetable oil was mixed in products claimed to be milk cream and ghee1d5:T789,27 per cent samples of edible oil, other food items from 4 firms in Thane found adulterated: FDA newindianexpress.com THANE: At least 27 per cent of the 56 samples of cooking oil and other food items collected from four companies in Maharashtra's Thane district have been found adulterated or with false claims, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) officials said.
The FDA's (Foods) Joint Commissioner, S R Kekre, said the samples tested revealed that palmolein oil was mixed in products sold as sunflower and soyabean oils, rice bran oil was mixed in a product sold as mustard oil and vegetable oil was mixed in products claimed to be milk cream and ghee.
Based on complaints, the FDA had carried out raids and inspected the four units located in Dahisar Mori, Bhiwandi, Kalher and Koparkhairne areas of the district, it said in a release.
Kekre asked customers to be cautious while purchasing these items.
The FDA was in the process of verifying as to whom the wholesalers and manufacturers had sold these adulterated products, he said.
Kekre also appealed to the citizens to contact the FDA if they find any substandard or adulterated goods in markets. ghee adulteration FDA inspection alleged Thane district, Maharashtra, India, Thane district, Maharashtra palmolein oil fflo:isSubstituteFor sunflower oil palmolein oil was mixed in products sold as sunflower palmolein oil fflo:isSubstituteFor soyabean oil palmolein oil was mixed in products sold as sunflower and soyabean oils rice bran oil fflo:isSubstituteFor mustard oil rice bran oil was mixed in a product sold as mustard oil vegetable oil fflo:isSubstituteFor milk cream vegetable oil was mixed in products claimed to be milk cream vegetable oil fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee vegetable oil was mixed in products claimed to be milk cream and ghee mixing palmolein oil in sunflower oil fflo:hasFraudType Substitution palmolein oil was mixed in products sold as sunflower1d6:Td0d,Operation Oil: manufacturer to be allowed to launch only one brand of oil  thehindu.com Tightening the noose around the adulterated coconut oil manufacturers, the State government has decided to allow a manufacturer to launch only one brand of coconut oil. The norm would be strictly enforced in the State with a view to curbing the sale of spurious coconut oil, said Health Minister Veena George here on Wednesday.
Requesting all coconut oil producers to obtain brand registration compulsorily, the Minister said the government would not allow the sale of coconut oil without brand registration. Legal action would be initiated against the coconut oils without brand registration after seizing of the stock. Further, the presence of sulphur in the oil would be checked by the authorities, said Ms. George.
The Food Safety department launched a special drive called ‘Operation Oil’ as part of curbing the sale of adulterated coconut oil in the State. Over 100 centers were inspected in the last two days and notices were issued against the violators of safety norms who were also slapped with fines. Inspections by the Food Safety Department would continue in the coming days, said the Minister.
To ensure safe food, a campaign ‘good food, right of the society’ was implemented by the department. As part of this campaign, inspections were carried out under various names—Operation Shawarma, Operation Matsya, and Operation Jaggery. Since the month of October, 4,905 inspections were conducted in various districts. Around 6,959 kg of stale fish was seized and destroyed by the officials as part of 446 inspections conducted under Operation Matsya.
Similarly, legal action was taken against 177 shops that did not comply with the norms under Operation Shawarma. As many as 651 samples had been collected and sent for lab tests. Notices were issued against 294 institutions and fines were collected. The State also issued guidelines for making shawarma and implemented the Clean Street Food Hub project, said the Minister.
Published - November 16, 2022 08:09 pm IST coconut oil adulteration substandard Operation Oil suspected Kerala, India Operation Shawarma fflo:targets shawarma legal action was taken against 177 shops that did not comply with the norms under Operation Shawarma Operation Matsya fflo:targets fish 6,959 kg of stale fish was seized and destroyed by the officials as part of 446 inspections conducted under Operation Matsya Operation Jaggery fflo:targets jaggery inspections were carried out under various names—Operation Shawarma, Operation Matsya, and Operation Jaggery coconut oil fflo:hasAdulterant sulphur presence of sulphur in the oil would be checked Operation Oil fflo:targets coconut oil special drive called 'Operation Oil' as part of curbing the sale of adulterated coconut oil Operation Oil fflo:issuedBy Food Safety department Food Safety department launched a special drive called 'Operation Oil' brand registration norm lkif:created_by State government State government has decided to allow a manufacturer to launch only one brand of coconut oil brand registration norm fflo:appliesToFood coconut oil allow a manufacturer to launch only one brand of coconut oil fines fflo:issuedBy Food Safety department notices were issued against the violators of safety norms who were also slapped with fines1d7:T943,Over 1,000 kg duplicate ghee seized in Surat theshillongtimes.com SURAT, Nov 9: Over 1,000 kg duplicate ghee (clarified butter) was seized from Kim taluka in Surat, police said on Wednesday.
Acting on a tip-off, Surat police seized 1,072 kg duplicate ghee on Tuesday evening.
As per information, one Mehul Patel was running a duplicate ghee business from Kudsad village, Kim Police Inspector J S Rajput told mediapersons.
Posing himself as a dairy farm and a cow stable owner, Patel ran a factory in the backyard of stable where he used to mix palm oil, colour, essence and even little pure ghee into vegetable ghee.
He used to repack it in the name of Kamdhenu Dairy product and sell as pure ghee on e-commerce platforms Jio mart, Amazon and Flipkart.
The accused was buying vegetable ghee in large quantities, and it was also seized by the police.
Samples of both ghees are sent to FSL, and if the samples are found adulterated, a criminal complaint will be lodged against Patel and he will be arrested. ghee adulteration substitution mislabeling palm oil colour essence seizure alleged Surat, Gujarat, India palm oil fflo:isSubstituteFor pure ghee mix palm oil, colour, essence and even little pure ghee into vegetable ghee Duplicate Ghee Adulteration Act prov:wasAssociatedWith Mehul Patel one Mehul Patel was running a duplicate ghee business Duplicate Ghee Adulteration Act prov:used vegetable ghee used to mix palm oil, colour, essence and even little pure ghee into vegetable ghee colour prov:wasGeneratedBy Duplicate Ghee Adulteration Act mix palm oil, colour, essence duplicate ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil mix palm oil, colour, essence and even little pure ghee into vegetable ghee duplicate ghee fflo:hasAdulterant colour mix palm oil, colour, essence duplicate ghee fflo:hasAdulterant essence mix palm oil, colour, essence Duplicate Ghee Adulteration Method fflo:hasFraudType Substitution mix palm oil, colour, essence and even little pure ghee into vegetable ghee Repackaging vegetable ghee as pure ghee fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling repack it in the name of Kamdhenu Dairy product and sell as pure ghee duplicate ghee seizure fflo:inRegion Surat seized from Kim taluka in Surat duplicate ghee fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy duplicate ghee (clarified butter) Seizure of duplicate ghee fflo:issuedBy Surat Police Surat police seized 1,072 kg duplicate ghee1d8:T88d,Over 1,000 kg adulterated ghee seized in Surat ibtimes.co.in Over 1,000 kg duplicate ghee (clarified butter) was seized from Kim taluka in Surat, police said on Wednesday.
Acting on a tip-off, Surat police seized 1,072 kg duplicate ghee on Tuesday evening.
As per information, one Mehul Patel was running a duplicate ghee business from Kudsad village, Kim Police Inspector J S Rajput told mediapersons.
Posing himself as a dairy farm and a cow stable owner, Patel ran a factory in the backyard of stable where he used to mix palm oil, colour, essence and even little pure ghee into vegetable ghee.
He used to repack it in the name of Kamdhenu Dairy product and sell as pure ghee on e-commerce platforms Jio mart, Amazon and Flipkart.
The accused was buying vegetable ghee in large quantities, and it was also seized by the police.
Samples of both ghees are sent to FSL, and if the samples are found adulterated, a criminal complaint will be lodged against Patel and he will be arrested.
(With inputs from IANS) ghee adulteration palm oil colour essence seizure pending criminal complaint alleged Surat, Gujarat, India Duplicate ghee production in Kudsad prov:wasAssociatedWith Mehul Patel one Mehul Patel was running a duplicate ghee business from Kudsad village palm oil fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee mix palm oil, colour, essence and even little pure ghee into vegetable ghee Duplicate ghee production in Kudsad prov:used vegetable ghee used to mix palm oil, colour, essence and even little pure ghee into vegetable ghee Duplicate ghee production in Kudsad prov:used palm oil used to mix palm oil, colour, essence and even little pure ghee into vegetable ghee duplicate ghee fflo:hasAdulterant colour used to mix palm oil, colour, essence and even little pure ghee into vegetable ghee Duplicate ghee production in Kudsad prov:used vegetable ghee used to mix palm oil, colour, essence and even little pure ghee into vegetable ghee duplicate ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil mix palm oil, colour, essence and even little pure ghee into vegetable ghee duplicate ghee fflo:hasAdulterant colour mix palm oil, colour, essence duplicate ghee fflo:hasAdulterant essence mix palm oil, colour, essence1d9:T629,Racket Selling Fake Ghee Online Busted | Surat News - Times of India indiatimes.com SURAT: Police raided a duplicate ghee-making unit at Kudsad village of Surat district on Tuesday and recovered materials worth Rs 14 lakh. Police also arrested racketeer 
Mehul Patel for allegedly running the clandestine operation of selling a spurious concoction of pure ghee, palm oil and vegetable fat labelled as pure cow ghee. Patel sold the fake ghee through online platforms.
Following specific information, the police raided Patelâs cattle shed and discovered the unit where he employed people to mix and pack the duplicate ghee. The accused was selling the fake product under the label of Kamdhenu Pure Cow Ghee. 
Cops got the fake product tested through the food and drug department. Probe revealed that Patel had bought vegetable ghee in bulk from a manufacturing unit and stored it at his place. 
To make the duplicate ghee he mixed this vegetable ghee with palm oil and pure ghee made from the butter of his cattle farm. ghee adulteration substitution palm oil vegetable fat raid arrest alleged Surat, Gujarat, India vegetable fat fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee spurious concoction of pure ghee, palm oil and vegetable fat labelled as pure cow ghee ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Mehul Patel arrested racketeer Mehul Patel for allegedly running the clandestine operation ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod mixing and packing employed people to mix and pack the duplicate ghee mixing and packing fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional allegedly running the clandestine operation1da:T4d2,Hyderabad: 7 LPG cylinders seized in cordon and search; 10 held siasat.com Hyderabad: The Chaderghat police on Sunday detained 10 persons and 1 history-sheeter, for the illegal sale of gas cylinders, and seized 45 bikes as owners failed to produce supporting documents.
The police searched houses as part of the operation, seven LPG cylinders used in the illegal sale and refill, and 65 liquor bottles were seized after raiding a belt shop.
During the search, the police bused an oil adulteration racket and seized 75 kgs of adulterated oil in which animal carcasses were also used.
Over 500 police personnel participated in the cordon and search, led by DCP (east) Sunil Dutt. edible oil adulteration animal carcasses seizure alleged Hyderabad, Telangana, India adulterated oil fflo:hasAdulterant animal carcasses seized 75 kgs of adulterated oil in which animal carcasses were also used adulterated oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod addition of animal carcasses adulterated oil in which animal carcasses were also used seizure of 75 kgs of adulterated oil fflo:issuedBy Chaderghat police The Chaderghat police ... seized 75 kgs of adulterated oil seizure of adulterated oil fflo:targets adulterated oil seized 75 kgs of adulterated oil1db:T626,Mustard, Palm Olein Oil Worth â¹7.7l Seized | Kanpur News - Times of India indiatimes.com Kanpur: Teams of FSA on Thursday seized over 604 liters of mustard and palm olein oil worth Rs 7,67,800 from various vendors in city.
Besides, the department also collected as many as 23 samples for lab testing. According to Vijay Pratap Singh assistant commissioner (food) â II /designated officer on Thursday, raids were conducted in some big stores and sweets shops of the city.
Samples of coriander powder, Soya Sauce and Paneer Masala were collected from Reliance retails Govind Nagar, three samples of sweets were collected by the team led by additional city magistrate first from Shanti Niketan Kidwai Nagar.
Around 204 litre of mustard oil was collected for loose sale, 1000 liters of rice bran oil for loose sale, and 2500kg of Palmolein were seized by the department. Samples of sweets, Mawa, and spices were also collected from some big hotels and shopping complexes. mustard oil palm olein oil substandard adulteration seizure suspected Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India seizure of mustard and palm olein oil fflo:issuedBy FSA Teams of FSA on Thursday seized over 604 liters of mustard and palm olein oil Paneer Masala sample fflo:collectedAt Retail Samples of coriander powder, Soya Sauce and Paneer Masala were collected from Reliance retails Mawa sample fflo:collectedAt Retail Samples of sweets, Mawa, and spices were also collected from some big hotels spices sample fflo:collectedAt Retail Samples of sweets, Mawa, and spices were also collected from some big hotels1dc:T515,Fake Milk Food Items Seized In Dausa | Jaipur News - Times of India indiatimes.com Jaipur: The 
CID wing of Rajasthan police busted a major spurious milk food product factory in Dausa ahead of 
Diwali.
The CID teams raided the factory located in Dausa district on Tuesday and seized 5,000 kg of desi ghee and over 4,000 kg of butter and collected samples of dry milk powder too. 
The CID officials said they had learned about a factory producing and selling spurious products.
A CID team including DSP Pushpendra Singh Rathore, inspector Ram Singh Nathawat and others went to the factory to conduct a search operation.
Police said such special operations are being conducted with the help of food safety officials ahead of Diwali. âThe demand for milk products always increases before the festive season. Therefore, many companies indulge in mixing chemicals to increase production and sell it quickly in the market to meet the demand,â said an official. TNN ghee adulteration counterfeit spurious milk products raid seizure alleged Dausa, Rajasthan, India production of spurious milk products prov:wasAssociatedWith spurious milk food product factory in Dausa busted a major spurious milk food product factory in Dausa mixing chemicals fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional indulge in mixing chemicals1dd:T70f,Mumbai: Ahead of Diwali, FDA seizes 400 kg adulterated ghee worth Rs 3 lakh in Masjid Bandar mid-day.com Mumbai: Ahead of Diwali, FDA seizes 400 kg adulterated ghee worth Rs 3 lakh in Masjid Bandar
According to the FDA officials, ahead of the Diwali festival, the Mumbai region of the FDA has been vigilant about the food quality used and sold in the market and has taken action against manufacturers for violating the quality under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006
Seized samples of ghee by FDA Maharashtra. Pic/FDA
Maharashtra’s Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) officials seized adulterated ghee which was being sold in substandard quality from a godown at Masjid Bandar. The stock worth Rs three lakh was seized during a raid at the godown in the Chinchbandar area, Masjid Bandar.
According to the FDA officials, ahead of the Diwali festival, the Mumbai region of the FDA has been vigilant about the food quality used and sold in the market and has taken action against manufacturers for violating the quality under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. ghee adulteration substandard seizure alleged Mumbai, Maharashtra, India finding of substandard quality ghee fflo:foundIn ghee seized adulterated ghee which was being sold in substandard quality ghee fflo:hasAdulterant unspecified adulterant seized adulterated ghee which was being sold in substandard quality seizure of adulterated ghee fflo:targets ghee seized adulterated ghee seizure of adulterated ghee fflo:citesFinding finding of substandard quality ghee seized adulterated ghee which was being sold in substandard quality finding of substandard quality ghee fflo:inRegion Mumbai Mumbai region of the FDA seizure of adulterated ghee prov:wasAttributedTo manufacturers taken action against manufacturers for violating the quality1de:T9b8,FDA seizes 400 kg adulterated ghee worth Rs 3 lakh in Mumbai freepressjournal.in Mumbai: The Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) of Maharashtra seized adulterated ghee that was being sold at a godown in Masjid Bandar, on Tuesday. The seized food products have been estimated to be worth around Rs 3 lakh.
The FDA has launched a special campaign to scan and maintain the quality of food during Diwali, since sweets and other foods are sold in bulk quantities across the state.
The department recently initiated action and stated that after the submission of food samples to the laboratory for testing, further action will be taken, depending on the reports, for violating the quality under the Food Safety and Standards Act.
On October 18, the FDA got information about the Masjid Bandar godown after which a raid was conducted and three food samples of ghee from Rishabh Shuddha Ghee Bhandar godown (Chinchbandar) were taken for analysis. The remaining stock of 400 kg, worth Rs 2,99,090 was seized.
During the annual Diwali raid on adulterated food in 2020, the FDA department seized edible items worth Rs4 crore in a week-long drive. According to FDA officials, they inspected edible oil, mawa, sweets, milk and raw food material, including tea and Indian spices during such raids.
The FDA has alerted people to purchase food items only from known sellers and check expiry dates and other details on products they purchase. Also, people can call helpline numbers to complain against dealers selling adulterated food products and following unfair trade practices, the officials informed. ghee adulteration seizure pending_test India, Masjid Bandar, Mumbai seizure of 400 kg adulterated ghee fflo:issuedBy Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) of Maharashtra The Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) of Maharashtra seized adulterated ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant unspecified adulterant in ghee seized adulterated ghee adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt Storage seized adulterated ghee that was being sold at a godown laboratory analysis of ghee fso:isPerformedOn ghee sample from Rishabh Shuddha Ghee Bhandar submission of food samples to the laboratory for testing FDA seizure of ghee fflo:targets ghee The remaining stock of 400 kg, worth Rs 2,99,090 was seized. seizure of 400 kg ghee fflo:issuedBy Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) of Maharashtra The Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) of Maharashtra seized adulterated ghee seizure of 400 kg ghee fflo:targets ghee seized adulterated ghee1df:Tc38,Factories Making Fake Ghee Of Well-known Brands Busted In City | Jaipur News - Times of India indiatimes.com JAIPUR: At least two factories manufacturing spurious ghee of well-known brands such as Saras and Krishna have been unearthed here in the past 10 days.
The health department has seized spurious ghee of branded products and sent the same for laboratory testing. The two factories were unearthed in Harmada and at Ajmer Road. 
Chief medical health officer (Jaipur-I) Dr Vijay Singh said a health department team with Jaipur dairy official raided a a factory that was manufacturing spurious 
Krishna and Saras ghee on Ajmer Road.
Health department officials said the accused were manufacturing spurious ghee by using refined oil, vegetable oil and cheap palmolein oil. 
Officials said they have seized 3 tins of refined soybean oil for making ghee, 42 empty tins, a 500 ml bottle of flavor to prepare ghee, gas furnace, steel tank, packing machine, empty bags and wrappers. Other items were found on the spot were 160 packets of ghee brand Saras of half-litre and 1 litre, 110 packets of half-litre of Krishna brand and 234 packets of 1 litre and 1 tin of 15 kg. Spurious ghee was found to be 549 kg.
The officials filed complaint at Karni Vihar police station against the accused. 
On Saturday, health department had unearthed a unit manufacturing fake famous brand of ghee in Harmada area. 
Officials said boxes of fake Saras, Krishna and Amul ghee have been seized from the possession of Mahendra Kumar Sharma in Rajiyawas, Harmada. 
A report has been filed against the accused Sharma in the Harmada police station in the case of selling fake Saras Ghee. ghee adulteration seizure report_filed pending_test India, Harmada India, Ajmer Road spurious ghee fflo:hasAdulterant refined oil manufacturing spurious ghee by using refined oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable oil manufacturing spurious ghee by using refined oil, vegetable oil and cheap palmolein oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palmolein oil manufacturing spurious ghee by using refined oil, vegetable oil and cheap palmolein oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant refined oil manufacturing spurious ghee by using refined oil Fake Ghee Incident in Harmada fflo:foundIn ghee On Saturday, health department had unearthed a unit manufacturing fake famous brand of ghee in Harmada area. Fake Ghee Incident in Harmada fflo:inRegion Harmada unearthed a unit manufacturing fake famous brand of ghee in Harmada area fake ghee fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee fake famous brand of ghee spurious ghee fflo:hasAdulterant refined soybean oil seized 3 tins of refined soybean oil for making ghee spurious ghee fflo:hasAdulterant flavor bottle of flavor to prepare ghee spurious ghee fflo:foundAt Harmada factories were unearthed in Harmada Seizure of fake ghee in Harmada prov:wasAttributedTo Mahendra Kumar Sharma boxes of fake Saras, Krishna and Amul ghee have been seized from the possession of Mahendra Kumar Sharma Fake Ghee Incident in Harmada fflo:triggeredAction Report filed against Mahendra Kumar Sharma A report has been filed against the accused Sharma in the Harmada police station1e0:T8c7,Uttarakhand: A year on, mustard oil manufacturer, supplier penalised for adulteration | Dehradun News - Times of India indiatimes.com In a matter of violation of food safety standards, a local court in Pauri penalised a supplier and a manufacturer of mustard oil with Rs 3 lakh, holding them guilty of adulteration. The sample was collected a few days before the festival of Holi in 2021. 
The Food Safety and Drug Administration (FSDA) department becomes more active during festive seasons to ensure no adulterated food items are sold in the market.
The court of additional district magistrate of Pauri Ela Giri imposed a penalty of Rs 2 lakh on the mustard oil manufacturer at Balaji Udyog located in Haryana's Rewari and a penalty of Rs 1 lakh on the supplier Sandip Jain who runs his business at Najibabad road in Kotdwar.
 FSDA officer Rachna Lal collected samples in March 2021 during the frisking of a vehicle loaded with food items in Pauri. The samples of sugar, gram flour and mustard oil were sent to the lab for examination. In July 2021, its report came, which suggested that mustard oil was adulterated. The FSDA officials filed a case at the ADM court in October 2021 mustard oil adulteration unspecified penalty lab_confirmed Pauri, Uttarakhand, India mustard oil adulteration finding fflo:inRegion Uttarakhand Uttarakhand: A year on, mustard oil manufacturer, supplier penalised for adulteration mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant unspecified adulterant report came, which suggested that mustard oil was adulterated mustard oil adulteration finding prov:wasAttributedTo Balaji Udyog penalty of Rs 2 lakh on the mustard oil manufacturer at Balaji Udyog mustard oil adulteration finding prov:wasAttributedTo Sandip Jain penalty of Rs 1 lakh on the supplier Sandip Jain mustard oil sample fso:hasLocation Pauri frisking of a vehicle loaded with food items in Pauri mustard oil adulteration finding fflo:foundIn mustard oil report came, which suggested that mustard oil was adulterated mustard oil adulteration finding fflo:triggeredAction penalty of Rs 3 lakh penalised a supplier and a manufacturer of mustard oil with Rs 3 lakh mustard oil adulteration finding fflo:foundAtStep Distribution frisking of a vehicle loaded with food items1e1:Tb1b,Adulterated sweets, wrongly labelled items caught by FDA during festive season hindustantimes.com Adulterated sweets, wrongly labelled items caught by FDA during festive season
To intercept the adulterated food even before they reach the local markets, FDA officials kept a vigil at railway stations and bus stops where the adulterated food movement was anticipated from.
Payal Gwalani
Payal.gwalani@hindustantimes.com
Mumbai: In a special drive run to prevent adulterated food to reach consumers, the Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) has caught several samples of food items required in making sweets. They also caught many wrongly labelled items during this drive.
Starting on August 1, just ahead of the Ganpati festival, the drive will continue till the end of December. It will be intensified this month to prevent the large-scale sale of adulterated sweets during Diwali. The entire batches of the foods found adulterated were destroyed and FIRs were lodged against manufacturers in some cases.
“We found a lot of adulterated mawa coming into the city from neighbouring states like Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh,” said Shashikant Kekare, joint commissioner (food). “In other cases, vegetable oil was mixed with ghee to bring down its price and palm oil with higher quality oils like groundnut and sunflower.”
He added that some local farsan (salty snacks) and sweet manufacturers who did not comply with the orders of mentioning a clear best-before date on the packaging were also taken to task.
To intercept the adulterated food even before they reach the local markets, FDA officials kept a vigil at railway stations and bus stops where the adulterated food movement was anticipated from.
Kekare said that though it was not a crime to mix different kinds of oils, the manufacturer needed to mention the ingredients as well as the proportion they are used in on the package.
“In many cases, the selling prices remain that of the higher priced oil even though a lesser quality oil is mixed in. This amounts to cheating the consumer,” he added.
Kekare said consumers also need to be more aware, especially during the festive season. ghee vegetable oil adulteration vegetable oil destruction FIR lodged alleged Mumbai, Maharashtra, India palm oil fflo:isSubstituteFor sunflower oil palm oil with higher quality oils like groundnut and sunflower ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod mixing vegetable oil with ghee vegetable oil was mixed with ghee to bring down its price FIRs lodged fflo:issuedBy Food and Drugs Administration FIRs were lodged against manufacturers mawa fflo:foundAt Gujarat adulterated mawa coming into the city from neighbouring states like Gujarat FDA officials kept a vigil fflo:targets farsan FDA officials kept a vigil at railway stations and bus stops where the adulterated food movement was anticipated from1e2:T64b,2500 litres of suspected adulterated cooking oil seized thehindu.com A joint team of the Special Branch police and the Food Safety Department personnel on Wednesday seized 2,500 litres of suspected adulterated cooking oil during a raid on an oil mill at Vennampalli village in Saidapur mandal of Karimnagar district.
The raid was conducted following complaints of sale of “adulterated” cooking oil by labelling it as “refined sunflower oil” in plastic containers at Kaveri oil mill of “Vishnu Industries”, a police press release said.
During the inspection, the joint squad reportedly found alleged violations of the stipulated norms under various counts. Samples of the seized oil were sent to the Food Laboratory for analysis, the press release added.
Karimnagar Police Special Branch Inspectors G Venkateshwarlu and B Santosh Kumar led the raid.
Published - October 12, 2022 08:45 pm IST cooking oil adulteration mislabeling seizure raid suspected Vennampalli, Karimnagar, Telangana, India Labeling cooking oil as refined sunflower oil fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling labelling it as “refined sunflower oil” Adulteration of sunflower oil at Kaveri oil mill prov:wasAssociatedWith Vishnu Industries Kaveri oil mill of "Vishnu Industries" Analysis of seized oil fso:isPerformedOn Sample of seized sunflower oil Samples of the seized oil were sent to the Food Laboratory for analysis Analysis of seized oil fso:isPerformedAt Food Laboratory sent to the Food Laboratory for analysis Sample of seized cooking oil fflo:collectedAt Processing Samples of the seized oil were sent to the Food Laboratory1e3:Ta43,FDA adopts zero-tolerance policy for edible oil sold loose and in reused tins | Nagpur News - Times of India indiatimes.com Nagpur: The Food and drugs administration (FDA) has stepped up its crackdown on edible oils sold loose and also in reused tins.
In 2022 till date, FDA has seized 2,075 kgs of edible oils worth more than Rs 2.99 lakhs. These seizures were from traders found violating norms. The raids were conducted by assistant commissioner Abhay Deshpande and joint commissioner Suresh Annapure.
On September 19, FDA had raided a grocery shop at Saoner seizing around 358 kg loose oil worth Rs 46,542.
On September 27, around 686.8 kgs of loose edible oil worth Rs 86,536 were seized from M/s Shree Trading company, Rameshwari Road, belonging to one Amritlal Sahu.
Deshpande said selling of loose edible oil is prohibited as per the regulations mentioned in the Food Safety and Standard Act, 2002. âThe loose edible oils have higher chances of being adulterated and substandard quality. Consumers should not go for cheaper loose edible oils and face health complications,â said Deshpande.
FDA, continuing its raiding actions, have commenced a consistent drive against the unscrupulous traders selling loose edible oil in reused tins.
Around 6,684.85 kgs of edible oils worth more than Rs 10.46 lakhs were seized this year by FDA team.
On September 16, FDA team conducted a raid at Prabhu Trading at Quetta Colony seizing more than 802 kgs of edible oil worth more than Rs 1.41 lakhs.
In yet another raid on September 26, the FDA team had seized 973.4 kgs of edible oils worth more than Rs 1.19 lakhs stored in reused tins from the premises of M/s Mohandas Hariram and company at Teliapura.
Deshpande said oil merchants associations and traders' bodies were told not to sell oil in loose quantities. âThere would be periodic and random raids on oil merchants and traders,â said Deshpande stating reused tins can prove perilous for health as âno one knows whether they were properly cleaned or dried before refilling with labels of the branded companiesâ. edible oil substandard adulteration seizure suspected Nagpur, Maharashtra, India Food Safety and Standard Act, 2002 fflo:appliesToFood edible oil selling of loose edible oil is prohibited as per the regulations mentioned in the Food Safety and Standard Act, 2002 seizure of 2,075 kgs of edible oils fflo:targets edible oil FDA has seized 2,075 kgs of edible oils seizure of 2,075 kgs of edible oils fflo:issuedBy Food and drugs administration (FDA) FDA has seized 2,075 kgs of edible oils seizure of edible oils fflo:issuedBy FDA seized this year by FDA team1e4:T774,Using counterfeit packaging lands Ropar trader in police net tribuneindia.com Ropar, September 15
The police have arrested a person and seized counterfeit packaging of Tata salt, Patanjali mustard oil and Harpic toilet cleaner from his possession.
The accused has been identified as Gian Singh, a resident of Bann Majra village.
Hussanpreet Singh from Speed Search and Security Networks had lodged a complaint in this regard.
The complainant said there were multiple reports of counterfeit products (mentioned above) being sold in the area. He said salt and mustard oil of cheaper brands was being refilled and sold in packaging of branded products.
SHO Harpreet Singh said they had seized 497 packets of Tata salt, 170 bottles of Patanjali mustard oil and 961 bottles of Harpic. Cops also confiscated 140 grams of opium from the accused. A case has been registered under Section 63 of the Copyright Act and the NDPS Act. mustard oil substitution mislabeling counterfeit cheaper brands arrest seizure alleged Ropar, Punjab, India mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod refilling cheaper brands in branded packaging salt and mustard oil of cheaper brands was being refilled and sold in packaging of branded products Counterfeit packaging operation prov:wasAssociatedWith Gian Singh The police have arrested a person... identified as Gian Singh Counterfeit packaging operation prov:used mustard oil seized counterfeit packaging of Tata salt, Patanjali mustard oil Counterfeit packaging operation prov:used salt seized counterfeit packaging of Tata salt Refilling cheaper brands in branded packaging fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling sold in packaging of branded products Refilling cheaper brands in branded packaging fflo:hasFraudType Substitution salt and mustard oil of cheaper brands was being refilled Arrest and seizure fflo:targets mustard oil seized counterfeit packaging of Tata salt, Patanjali mustard oil1e5:T689,Spurious Ghee Factory Busted, Four Arrested | Kanpur News - Times of India indiatimes.com KANPUR: The city police with the arrest of four persons busted a factory manufacturing spurious ghee operational in Ratanpur here on Monday. Spurious ghee, equipment, branded company cans and other items were recovered. Police said a few suspects were living in a rented accommodation in Ratanpur area of Panki since the past few months.
 On a tip-off, Panki police raided the house on Monday morning and found a factory manufacturing spurious ghee.
Police arrested Rafiq, a resident of Bihar, Aftab, a resident of Modi Nagar, Ghaziabad, Ankit Kumar and 
Firoz Khan of Bulandshahr. Nearly 500 liters of spurious ghee, equipment for preparing ghee, cans of branded companies and chemicals were recovered. 
Inspector Panki Anjan Kumar Singh said that after the raid, the food department team reached the spot and initiated an investigation. The accused used to prepare fake ghee by mixing a special type of chemical in refined and vegetable ghee. âIt was widely sold in rural areas,â he said and added, âRaids are on for the aides of arrested accused.â ghee adulteration special type of chemical arrest raid seizure alleged Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India Spurious Ghee Manufacturing Act prov:used ghee factory manufacturing spurious ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant special type of chemical prepare fake ghee by mixing a special type of chemical Spurious Ghee Manufacturing Act prov:used refined ghee mixing a special type of chemical in refined and vegetable ghee Spurious Ghee Manufacturing Act fflo:foundAt Ratanpur busted a factory manufacturing spurious ghee operational in Ratanpur1e6:Tb2e,Chennai: Shop with 4.3 tonnes of blended cooking oil in sump sealed indiatimes.com CHENNAI: Food safety officials in Chennai on Tuesday sealed a small oil shop in Pillayar Koil Street in West Mambalam for illegally stocking more than 4300 kg of blended cooking oil - palm oil and sunflower - and selling it without packaging.
 Oil was seized and samples were sent to food safety labs for detailed analysis.
Officials said the source of the oil was still unknown.
This could be just the tip of the iceberg, they said.
Many dealers may be pushing cooking oil, with no quality checks, to small traders, who stock large quantities without a licence and sell them illegally, according to the officials. 
"This shop was just four streets away from our office. It was shocking to see that this tiny shop can hold a stock of 4.3 tonne of oil," said Chennai's designated food safety officer Dr P Satheesh Kumar. The shop bought oil in barrels from different sources and stored it in a large underground tank. A motor was used to transfer the blended oil into an overhead tank. A pipe and tap connected to the tank were inside the shop. People bought their own vessels to buy oil at less than half the price of branded products. 
"Sale of unpacked oil is banned in 
Tamil Nadu. The vendor has also blended two oils in the most unscientific manner," he said. The oil collected in bottles had dust and sand, he added. "The trader had a licence for wholesale, but he was selling it in retail as well," he said.
When food safety officials attempted to seal the shop, residents and members of the traders' association protested. Officials explained the rules and the potential health hazards.
"Inquiry is on to find the source. We also want to check if there are many more shops selling oil like this," Dr Satheesh Kumar said.
 The trader has been given a show-cause notice.
Charges would be framed against the trader under the Food Safety Act if food labs declared the oil as "unfit for human consumption," officials said. blended cooking oil contamination substandard unsafe_food dust sand sealed show-cause notice suspected Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India blended cooking oil fkg:hasIngredient sunflower oil blended cooking oil - palm oil and sunflower Sealing of oil shop in Pillayar Koil Street fflo:issuedBy Chennai Food Safety Officials Food safety officials in Chennai on Tuesday sealed a small oil shop detailed analysis fso:isPerformedOn Oil samples samples were sent to food safety labs for detailed analysis blended cooking oil fflo:hasAdulterant dust The oil collected in bottles had dust and sand blended cooking oil fflo:hasAdulterant sand The oil collected in bottles had dust and sand blended cooking oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod unscientific blending blended two oils in the most unscientific manner trader fflo:foundAt retail he was selling it in retail as well1e7:T971,With Onam around, adulterated coconut oil floods Kerala market newindianexpress.com THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: With Onam around the corner, the flow of adulterated milk and coconut oil to Kerala has increased raising serious concern about the quality of the products sold in the market. Recently, Kerafed has raised a complaint with the Commissionerate of Food Safety Department seeking its intervention to prevent the flow of adulterated coconut oil brought in tankers from Tamil Nadu and other states.
The food safety authorities have decided to step up surveillance at check posts to screen the flow of coconut oil and milk from other states. Recently, the Dairy Development Department seized a tanker carrying 12,750 litres of urea-mixed milk. The managing director of Kerafed, in a complaint submitted to the food safety department, has urged the department to step up surveillance and do more quality checking to curb the sale of adulterated coconut oil.
Many adulterated coconut oil brands with names similar to ‘Kera’ — the coconut oil brand of Kerafed — are being sold in the state. Previously, the Food Safety Department banned around 166 coconut oil brands which were sub-standard and adulterated. Kerafed alleged that adulterated coconut oils are being sold at a reduced rate. While Kerafed is selling coconut oil at `180, some of the oil brands are selling their product between `30 and `40.
The food safety authorities are planning for special drives ahead of Onam from August 29. “Special squads have been formed to ensure the quality of food products sold in the market during Onam. The squads have collected around 140 surveillance samples so far,” an official of the Food Safety Department. coconut oil adulteration substandard unknown ban on 166 coconut oil brands special drives alleged Kerala, India milk fflo:hasAdulterant urea seized a tanker carrying 12,750 litres of urea-mixed milk seizure of urea-mixed milk fflo:issuedBy Dairy Development Department Dairy Development Department seized a tanker carrying 12,750 litres of urea-mixed milk ban on 166 coconut oil brands fflo:issuedBy Food Safety Department Food Safety Department banned around 166 coconut oil brands adulterated coconut oil finding fflo:inRegion Kerala adulterated coconut oil floods Kerala market transport of adulterated coconut oil fflo:occursAt Distribution adulterated coconut oil brought in tankers from Tamil Nadu1e8:Tc50,Over 4,000 litre of adulterated oil seized from Chennai store indianexpress.com Over 4,000 litre of adulterated oil seized from Chennai store
The officials noted that they have sent the samples of the oil to the laboratory. Further action will be taken depending on the result, the officials said.
Food safety department officials Tuesday raided a wholesale store near Saidapet in Chennai and seized around 4,400 litre of adulterated oil. The officials noted that the shop owners had been illegally storing the oil underground and selling it to the customers.
“The oil that we seized today was contaminated with mud and dust; it was totally unhygienic. We should never consume such oil.
The shop does not have a licence to store such a huge quantity of oil. Though it looks like a small shop from outside, they have a space underground where they had stored this oil in a sump. Everyday several barrels of oil were brought here in trucks and deposited in the sump. They have a huge tank on the top floor. They used to pump the oil from the sump using a motor. It is a crime to sell oil without any package, label, ISI mark, the address of the company, or the manufacturing date, etc. I urge the retailers not to sell oil on loose. We will initiate action against such shops,” Dr Satheesh Kumar, designated food safety officer in Chennai, told the reporters.
The shop was sealed and a notice issued to the owner. The officials noted that they have sent the samples of the oil to the laboratory. Further action will be taken depending on the result, the officials said.
When asked about the wrong practices followed by the eating outlets in Chennai, the officer has urged the owners of fast-food eateries to desist from serving meat delicacies which have been marinated and stored for over two days. He also asked the public not to consume food with artificial colours.
He said apart from the permissible amount of food colour, the fast foods should not add any other colour to make the dish look appealing to the customers. “Re-cooked oil is not allowed at all,” he said.
Commenting on the ‘shawarma’ controversy, Dr Satheesh Kumar said that the Arabic dish ‘shawarma’ is good food if it is prepared, stored and heated properly.
(Any complaint from the public regarding hygiene and food quality can be informed to the officials at their WhatsApp number 9444042322) oil adulteration contamination mud dust seizure sealing notice issued suspected Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India oil fflo:hasAdulterant mud oil that we seized today was contaminated with mud oil fflo:hasAdulterant dust oil that we seized today was contaminated with mud and dust oil fflo:belongsToCategory Oils seized around 4,400 litre of adulterated oil adulterated oil seizure fflo:foundAtStep wholesale store raided a wholesale store near Saidapet in Chennai and seized around 4,400 litre of adulterated oil oil fflo:foundAtStep underground storage illegally storing the oil underground selling without package or label fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling sell oil without any package, label, ISI mark, the address of the company oil fflo:foundAt Chennai seized from Chennai store1e9:T4ee,Loose Cooking Oil Seized, Fir Lodged Against Proprietor | Indore News - Times of India indiatimes.com INDORE: Indore district administration on Wednesday collected samples of cooking oil from a wholesale shop and seized soyabean oil worth Rs 34,500 on suspicion adulteration.
Acting on a complaint, collector 
Manish Singh and ADM Abhay Bedekar had instructed food safety department to carry out an inspection at M/S Sangeeta Traders in Tigariya. âIn the inspection, the team found sale, packing and storage of the cooking oil,â the ADM said, adding that the team collected five samples of loose cooking oil and seized 247 kg of cooking oil worth Rs 34,580.
Bedekar said that the oil was seized on suspicion of adulteration.
An FIR has been lodged against proprietor Jinendra Jain. soyabean oil cooking oil adulteration seizure FIR lodged suspected Indore, Madhya Pradesh, India AdulterationAct at M/S Sangeeta Traders prov:wasAssociatedWith M/S Sangeeta Traders inspection at M/S Sangeeta Traders soyabean oil fflo:belongsToCategory Oils seized soyabean oil loose cooking oil fflo:belongsToCategory Oils samples of loose cooking oil Seizure of soyabean oil at M/S Sangeeta Traders fflo:foundAtStep Retail collected samples of cooking oil from a wholesale shop1ea:T19ce,Alcohol poisoning and edible oil fraud cases soar in India foodnavigator-asia.com India has been a hotspot for food and beverage adulteration cases over the past several years, covering a wide range of products from dairy to honey and more – and after the COVID-19 pandemic hit the region, alcohol emerged as the most vulnerable sector for counterfeits due to high demand and low enforcement, a situation that has not abated since its spike was detected last year.
“In India, alcohol is particularly prone to being targeted for counterfeits – both cheap and branded types of alcohols are always in high demand [and] the unique situation that the COVID-19 crisis created [resulted] in a mismatch of demand and supply,” Authentication Solution Providers’ Association (ASPA) Secretary Chander Shekhar Jeena told FoodNavigator-Asia.
“Criminals have exploited this situation to make and sell illicit liquor [and they were enabled] because the high profit margins were attractive whilst the lack of evidence and penalisation was encouraging.”
Alcohol was identified in the ASPA State of Counterfeiting in India 2021 report as the most-counterfeited sector - and this situation appears to have continued on into 2022, with last seven days of July 2022 (23rd to 31st) alone having seen at least five large-scale fake alcohol operations rounded up all over the country.
Even more worryingly, a series of alcohol poisonings due to the consumption of counterfeit alcohol has also been taking place in multiple state – one of the most tragic saw 28 deaths across multiple villages in the state of Gujarat attributed to fake alcohol, with several dozen more hospitalised. At present, Gujarat enforces a complete ban on the purchase, consumption and possession of alcohol, a likely catalyst for the fake alcohol business.
In addition, the last two weeks of July 2022 also saw at least three adulterated oil rings busted in multiple Indian states including Rajasthan and Jharkhand, with thousands of litres of edible oil being confiscated.
Along with the adulterated oil, many cans, boxes and packaging materials with branded company names were also recovered, indicating that the majority of this oil had been destined to be packed as branded products and sent to local retailers and distributors to be sold for consumer consumption.
To prevent situations such as these from repeating themselves, ASPA has urged both industry and government to look more closely at implementing better anti-counterfeit strategies, particularly those with technological safeguards.
“As we move forward in the technology-enabled era, it is time that India also employs intelligent technology to solve the problems of counterfeiting that is damaging the economy from the inside,” ASPA President Nakul Pasricha said.
“The circulation of substandard and falsified products [such] as fake alcohol and adulterated dairy [attacks the public] on multiple levels – by threatening human and animal well-being, hampering brand profits, obstructing government revenues, robbing consumer faith and damaging brand India in the global market.
“We are seeing steps taken towards tackling counterfeiting in India e.g. in the pharmaceutical sector which has mandated 300 top brands to use QR codes on their packaging – [but] even these have not yet made their way into the food and beverage sector at full scale yet.
“[From a broader point of view, these are still small steps while the problem is much more complex - A strategic all-around plan and actions are required to curb the massive menace of counterfeiting in the country, utilising authentication solutions and robust track and trace infrastructure."
Technology is the answer
Although many Indian food and beverage are not yet seeing investments into anti-counterfeiting technology as a main priority, Pasricha stressed that it is wise to do this to put Indian F&B on the international map.
“The return on investment on authentication solutions is very significant, and other countries' positive impact of using the anti-counterfeit solutions has been proven, [so] we are confident that India will adopt this too,” he said.
“ASPA is in fact rolling out our five-year strategy to push national authentication and traceability forward, and within these we intend to focus on areas such as advancing R&D, increasing the awareness of Authentication and Traceability solutions (ATS) and promoting further adoption, as well as developing tools to measure the impact and scale of counterfeiting [both locally and internationally].
“This strategy will cover 2022 to 2027, and within this India is our first target to push more of these authentication and traceability technologies, as [we see that] counterfeiting is eroding over INR1tn (US$12.8bn) in the Indian economy, and these are essential tools for India to fight back.”
Pasricha also stressed that the although adulteration issues have ‘seeped deep into the ecosystem’ within India’s food and beverage industry, the magnitude of the issue is in face ‘still underestimated and undertreated’, urging for the fostering of better consumer behaviour, better brand practices, and better sensitisation on the part of regulatory bodies to make a ‘considerable dent’ in the nation’s adulteration issue. edible oil adulteration counterfeit adulterated oil confiscation alleged Rajasthan, India fake alcohol fflo:commonIn Gujarat 28 deaths across multiple villages in the state of Gujarat attributed to fake alcohol adulterated oil fflo:commonIn Rajasthan adulterated oil rings busted in multiple Indian states including Rajasthan alcohol fflo:commonIn India In India, alcohol is particularly prone to being targeted for counterfeits alcohol fflo:hasFraudType Counterfeiting alcohol emerged as the most vulnerable sector for counterfeits alcohol fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional Criminals have exploited this situation to make and sell illicit liquor fake alcohol fflo:causesEffect alcohol poisoning alcohol poisonings due to the consumption of counterfeit alcohol adulterated oil fflo:commonIn Jharkhand adulterated oil rings busted in multiple Indian states including ... Jharkhand adulterated oil fflo:foundAt Distribution sent to local retailers and distributors ASPA five-year strategy fflo:appliesTo India within this India is our first target ASPA five-year strategy fflo:hasDefinition advancing R&D, increasing awareness of ATS, promoting adoption, developing tools to measure impact focus on areas such as advancing R&D, increasing the awareness of Authentication and Traceability solutions1eb:Tc9d,Khargone: 500-kg spurious ghee, 1,682-litre adulterated edible oil seized freepressjournal.in Khargone (Madhya Pradesh): In a major crackdown, a team of Khargone administration seized 500-kilogram spurious ghee along with 1,682-litre mix brand edible oil and other chemicals from Bamnala village, about 15-kilometre away from the district headquarters in Bhimangaon tehsil.
The raid was conducted under the campaign against adulteration following the directives of district collector Kumar Purushottam by a joint team of SDM Shirali Jain, deputy collector Omnarayan Singh, food supply officer Manohar Thakur and food safety officer HL Avasya.
The team seized the spurious ghee, edible oil and other chemicals from the place which belongs to one Ibrahim Nirban Khan. Police recovered pamphlets, wrappers of brands like Madhur, Ruchi, Daawat, Kirti and Anmo and packing bottles, cane caps from the oil godown.
During preliminary investigation, it was revealed that spurious products of many big brands of edible oil are prepared in Bamnala village itself. Wrappers and pamphlets with lids of various sizes and colours were found in large quantities in the material. The lids are found in such a number that it is estimated that about 500 cans can be packed a day.
Many types of chemical essences, acid and gas stoves, cylinders, packaging machines etc. have also been found. Food safety officer HL Avasya informed that on suspicion of adulteration, food items were sent to the laboratory after taking two samples of ghee, samples of vegetable soybean oil, essence and copra oil, including nine samples. The material received from the factory making spurious ghee and Miss brand oil has been seized and sealed.
Two godowns and one shop were also investigated in Bhikangaon
Deputy collector Omnarayan Singh said that further information was received in the proceedings which started in Bamnala at 5 am. Based on which investigation was started in Bhikangaon also. Here the New Easy Grocery Store located at Bus Stand and National Traders located at Gulmohar Colony were investigated by breaking the locks of their premises. The locks were broken and a videography of the entire process was done and a panchnama was made in the presence of the CMO, station in-charge, SDM and the executive magistrate. Some suspicious food items were found here also. Thereafter, the premises were sealed and notices pasted . Further action will be taken after informing the proprietor in his presence.
Giving information, deputy collector Shri Singh, said that chemical was found in such quantity from the factory making fake ghee in Bamnala that about 10,000 kilograms of spurious ghee can be made. Apart from this, many other material have also been received. ghee adulteration spurious ghee seizure sealing alleged Khargone, Madhya Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant spurious ghee seized 500-kilogram spurious ghee Adulteration of ghee and edible oil in Bamnala prov:wasAssociatedWith Ibrahim Nirban Khan seized the spurious ghee, edible oil and other chemicals from the place which belongs to one Ibrahim Nirban Khan spurious ghee fflo:foundAt Bamnala village spurious products of many big brands of edible oil are prepared in Bamnala village1ec:Tec4,Ganj Basoda: Adulterated Oil surfaces in markets ahead of the festival season freepressjournal.in Ganj Basoda (Madhya Pradesh): As the festival season is round the corner, the use of low quality and adulterated edible oils has again taken over in the eateries situated in several rural areas of the Ganjbasoda district, such as Udaipur, Ghatera, Bareth, Pathari and Tyonda to name a few.
The situation has exacerbated due to the laxity of the food and drug department, which has given tacit approval to the shop owners and restaurant proprietors to trade low quality and adulterated oils.
The illegal supply and trade of the adulterated oil is ongoing in full swing at scores of places of the said rural areas, where the adulterated oil is being deceitfully sold as high quality oil by packaging it into plastic bottles and placing the sticker of the branded oils on it. Thereafter, the oil is sold to the consumers.
Despite the implementation of the Food Safety and Security Act, which attracts a fine and a provision of imprisonment, the illegal practice of mixing adulterated oil with branded Palm oil is in force. Note worthily, the rates of edible oil have been soaring lately, which have put the poor in a tight spot. Forced due to financial constraints, the poor are compelled to buy cheap quality oil, which in turn proves fatal for their health.
On the condition of anonymity, an employee of the food and drug department shed light on the issue. He stated that purchasing branded edible oils is too heavy on the general public's pocket. Thus, the people have resorted to buying cheap quality oils.
'This is also in the knowledge of the food department personnel, who are silent on the issue, as the general public's health is of no concern to them', he added. edible oil adulteration substitution mislabeling adulterated oil alleged Ganj Basoda, Madhya Pradesh, India adulterated oil fflo:commonIn Udaipur adulterated edible oils has again taken over in the eateries situated in several rural areas of the Ganjbasoda district, such as Udaipur adulterated oil fflo:commonIn Ghatera adulterated edible oils has again taken over in the eateries situated in several rural areas of the Ganjbasoda district, such as Udaipur, Ghatera adulterated oil fflo:commonIn Bareth adulterated edible oils has again taken over in the eateries situated in several rural areas of the Ganjbasoda district, such as Udaipur, Ghatera, Bareth adulterated oil fflo:commonIn Tyonda adulterated edible oils has again taken over in the eateries situated in several rural areas of the Ganjbasoda district, such as Udaipur, Ghatera, Bareth, Pathari and Tyonda adulterated oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod mixing adulterated oil with branded Palm oil illegal practice of mixing adulterated oil with branded Palm oil adulterated oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod packaging it into plastic bottles and placing the sticker of the branded oils on it the adulterated oil is being deceitfully sold as high quality oil by packaging it into plastic bottles and placing the sticker of the branded oils on it adulterated edible oil fflo:commonIn Ganj Basoda adulterated edible oils has again taken over in the eateries situated in several rural areas of the Ganjbasoda district Adulterated oil found in Ganj Basoda fflo:inRegion Ganj Basoda adulterated edible oils has again taken over in the eateries situated in several rural areas of the Ganjbasoda district packaging it into plastic bottles and placing the sticker of the branded oils on it fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling deceitfully sold as high quality oil by packaging it into plastic bottles and placing the sticker of the branded oils on it adulterated oil fflo:causesEffect fatal for their health cheap quality oil, which in turn proves fatal for their health1ed:T676,Khargone: Edible oil worth Rs 50 lakh seized freepressjournal.in Khargone (Madhya Pradesh): In a major crackdown on those involved in hoarding, a joint team of five departments led by deputy collector Omnarayan Singh conducted raids at shops and godowns of Gurukrupa Traders Bistan road and seized edible oil worth Rs 50,11,174. Officials involved in the raid admitted that this is the biggest action on a single establishment in the district so far.
Revenue, Mandi, Weights and Measures, Labour, Food Security and Food Supply departments were involved in the raid conducted on the directions of district collector Kumar Purushottam.
Besides edible oil, the team also found 135.69 quintals of illegal wheat. Whereas it is suspected that 1774 quintals of wheat have been stored without permission.
Deputy collector Singh said that business is allowed, but there is doubt on the permission to store.
During the investigation, it came to light that the repacking of oil is also done by the traders. Not only this, three weighing machines were not found to be verified in the investigation done by the Measurement Department. Apart from this, MRP has also been tampered with on five oil cans of 15 litres each.
During this action deputy collector Singh, food supply officer Manohar Thakur, assistant food inspector Bharat Jamre, food safety officer RR Solanki, HL Avasya, RR Solanki, measurement officer Pathak, labour officer Shailendra Solanki and their teams were present. edible oil mislabeling unsafe_food seizure raid suspected Khargone, Madhya Pradesh, India MRP tampering fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling MRP has also been tampered with on five oil cans1ee:Tc72,tinsukia police: Tinsukia Police Bust Oil Adulteration Racket Arrest 4, One On The Run indiatimes.com DIBRUGARH: Blowing the lid off a thriving adulterated oil racket in upper 
Assam, Tinsukia Police on Saturday arrested four persons and seized 14,000 litres of stolen condensate oil from Tinsukia and Dibrugarh districts. 
Tinsukia DSP Hiranya Kumar Borah, who led the operation, said based on information from Oil India Limited (OIL) security team, a raid was conducted in Tinsukia town which led to the recovery of 6,000 litres of stolen condensate oil from two vehicles, a dump truck and a winger passenger vehicle.
The oil, which was pilfered from pipelines, were kept in containers of 200 litres each. 
“We arrested the drivers of the two vehicles who told us that the stolen oil was supposed to be taken to RD Dhaba which is located beside NH-37 in the Chabua area of Dibrugarh district. We also came to know that the adulteration of oil was being carried out from a barricaded godown located behind the dhaba,” the DSP said. 
He added, “The gang, in connivance with the tanker drivers, used to take out certain amount of oil (diesel or petrol) from the tankers and replace it with cheap condensate oil. The tankers transport oil from the Indian Oil Corporation (IOC) plant in Digboi to various locations of the northeast. We raided the dhaba and the godown and seized 8,000 litres of oil which were stolen from oil tankers.” 
The DSP further said, “We also found chemicals like nitric acid and some powdered substances, which were used for adulterating oil. The owner of the dhaba, Rubul Dhuliya, who is the kingpin of the racket, is absconding. However, we have arrested two of the gang members.” 
Sources said the illegal oil theft and adulteration racket has been flourishing in the oil-rich districts of Tinsukia and Dibrugarh since last few years. The dhabas or roadside eateries along the NH-37, particularly in the 77-km stretch from Chabua (Dibrugarh district) to Sepon (Sivasagar district), are said to be the flashpoint of the illegal trade involving lakhs of rupees. condensate oil adulteration substitution condensate oil arrest seizure suspected Tinsukia, Assam, India condensate oil fflo:commonIn Dibrugarh seized 14,000 litres of stolen condensate oil from Tinsukia and Dibrugarh districts condensate oil fflo:foundAt RD Dhaba adulteration of oil was being carried out from a barricaded godown located behind the dhaba condensate oil fflo:foundAt barricaded godown behind RD Dhaba adulteration of oil was being carried out from a barricaded godown Replacing diesel or petrol with condensate oil fflo:hasFraudType Substitution replace it with cheap condensate oil oil adulteration racket prov:wasAssociatedWith Rubul Dhuliya owner of the dhaba, Rubul Dhuliya, who is the kingpin of the racket nitric acid fflo:commonIn Tinsukia racket has been flourishing in the oil-rich districts of Tinsukia nitric acid fflo:commonIn Dibrugarh racket has been flourishing in the oil-rich districts of Tinsukia and Dibrugarh illegal oil theft and adulteration racket fflo:commonIn Tinsukia and Dibrugarh flourishing in the oil-rich districts of Tinsukia and Dibrugarh1ef:T8c7,Detergent Found In Milk, Animal Fat In Ghee | Agra News - Times of India indiatimes.com AGRA: Milk samples collected by the food safety and drug administration (FSDA) in Firozabad in January have been reported to be unsafe for human consumption after lab testing. The FSDA tested a sample of ghee to discover that it was adulterated with animal fat or petroleum jelly. 
 Speaking about the matter, FSDA designated officer 
Sudhir Singh told TOI, âFour samples of milk and ghee failed the lab test and were found unsafe for human consumption. Two local dairies were found using detergents for manufacturing synthetic milk. Licenses of the adulterators have been cancelled and FIR will be registered against them.â 
 Milk producers are known to use these substances to prepare synthetic milk by mixing urea, caustic soda, refined oil and common detergents. In addition, some detergents contained dioxane, which is known to be a carcinogenic (cancer-causing) agent. According to FSDA officials, the concentration of urea in natural milk ranges from 0.2 to 0.7 g/l, whereas adulterated milk contains almost 20 times its natural concentration. ghee adulteration animal fat petroleum jelly license cancellation alleged Firozabad, Uttar Pradesh, India milk fflo:hasAdulterant detergent Two local dairies were found using detergents for manufacturing synthetic milk ghee fflo:hasAdulterant animal fat ghee to discover that it was adulterated with animal fat ghee fflo:hasAdulterant petroleum jelly The FSDA tested a sample of ghee to discover that it was adulterated with animal fat or petroleum jelly. milk fflo:hasAdulterant urea Milk producers are known to use these substances to prepare synthetic milk by mixing urea, caustic soda, refined oil and common detergents. dioxane fflo:causesEffect cancer dioxane, which is known to be a carcinogenic (cancer-causing) agent milk fflo:hasAdulterant caustic soda mixing urea, caustic soda, refined oil and common detergents milk fflo:hasAdulterant refined oil mixing urea, caustic soda, refined oil and common detergents milk fflo:hasAdulterant urea adulterated milk contains almost 20 times its natural concentration license cancellation fflo:issuedBy FSDA Licenses of the adulterators have been cancelled1f0:Tf9b,Delhi: Two arrested for selling adulterated ghee indiasnews.net New Delhi [India], April 10 (ANI): Two people have been arrested in the outer district of Delhi along with 1,250 kg of adulterated ghee. Police said on Sunday that they were allegedly selling duplicate ghee in the original ghee packets of other companies.
The accused, identified as Anshul and Arjun, started the ghee supply unit in November 2021 after the COVID-19 lockdown. They were supplying the adulterated ghee in different parts of Delhi.
The police informed that Arjun owned a factory and had employed his friends to refill the duplicate ghee in the ghee packets of other renowned companies. The other accused, Anshul, who runs a company named Balaji Trading, used to supply the packets in the market.
Speaking to ANI, the Deputy Commissioner of Police of Outer District, Sameer Sharma, said that a private company had filed a complaint against the alleged food adulteration and sales unit being operated in the Mangolpuri area. The police carried out three different raids and recovered 1,250 kgs of duplicate ghee and arrested the two persons operating the racket.
"On April 8, a raid was conducted and police found 250 boxes of fake ghee. The team carried out another operation and raided Balaji Trading Company from where 720 packets of adulterated ghee were recovered," DCP said.
He added, "In further investigation, police raided the place where the mixing in ghee was being done. The police found out the accused would bring the original packets of ghee from other companies and empty the packets. They would fill those packets with refined oil and dalda and seal them again."A case has been registered against the accused of cheating, adulteration of food and sale of noxious food products, police informed.
Further investigation into the case is underway and the police are on the lookout for other accused. (ANI) ghee adulteration substitution counterfeit duplicate ghee refined oil dalda arrest case registration seizure alleged Delhi, Outer District, India duplicate ghee fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee selling duplicate ghee in the original ghee packets ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Anshul Anshul, who runs a company named Balaji Trading, used to supply the packets ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Arjun Arjun owned a factory and had employed his friends to refill the duplicate ghee ghee adulteration act prov:used ghee selling duplicate ghee in the original ghee packets duplicate ghee prov:wasGeneratedBy ghee adulteration act selling duplicate ghee in the original ghee packets ghee adulteration act fflo:foundAt Mangolpuri sales unit being operated in the Mangolpuri area adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt Distribution supplying the adulterated ghee in different parts of Delhi ghee adulteration act prov:wasAssociatedWith Balaji Trading Anshul, who runs a company named Balaji Trading, used to supply the packets ghee fflo:hasAdulterant refined oil fill those packets with refined oil and dalda ghee fflo:hasAdulterant dalda fill those packets with refined oil and dalda ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod refilling original packets with adulterants empty the packets. They would fill those packets with refined oil and dalda and seal them again refilling original packets with adulterants fflo:hasFraudType Substitution fill those packets with refined oil and dalda and seal them again adulteration of ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith Balaji Trading Company raided Balaji Trading Company from where 720 packets of adulterated ghee were recovered recovery of adulterated ghee at Balaji Trading Company fflo:foundAtStep Retail raided Balaji Trading Company from where 720 packets of adulterated ghee were recovered refined oil fflo:foundAt Processing police raided the place where the mixing in ghee was being done recovery of adulterated ghee fflo:triggeredAction case registration for cheating and adulteration A case has been registered against the accused of cheating, adulteration of food1f1:T7f3,Fake ghee factory exposed in Delhi, 2 held with 1,259 litres of adulterated desi ghee of different brands india.com New Delhi: Two men were arrested for allegedly selling adulterated desi ghee in outer Delhi, police said on Sunday (April 10, 2022).
Anshul Bansal (22) and Arjun Kumar (30) were arrested and 1,259 litres of adulterated desi ghee of different brands was seized from them, they said.
The arrests were made on a complaint of Jitender Singh, SMC Food Ltd and VRS food Ltd marketing intelligence officer, regarding cheating and adulteration of desi ghee, police said.
The complainant alleged that some people were playing with the health of the public by selling spurious and adulterated desi ghee in outer Delhi and were tampering with packets of the company's original desi ghee by adding fake ghee to it and selling it as real ghee, the police said.
Deputy Commissioner of Police (Outer) Sameer Sharma said that a joint raid, along with the complainant and FSO team, was conducted at Puneet retail store at Pushpanji Enclave in this regard and two men, both residents of Rohini, were arrested.
"We recovered 1,259 litres of adulterated desi ghee of different brands on the instance of the arrested accused and further investigation in the case is in progress," he said.
Stay informed on all the latest news, real-time breaking news updates, and follow all the important headlines in india news and world news on Zee News. ghee adulteration counterfeit fake ghee arrest seizure alleged Delhi, Outer Delhi, India Adulteration of desi ghee in Delhi prov:used desi ghee selling adulterated desi ghee in outer Delhi fake ghee prov:wasGeneratedBy Adulteration of desi ghee in Delhi adding fake ghee to it and selling it as real ghee fake ghee fflo:isSubstituteFor desi ghee adding fake ghee to it and selling it as real ghee Adulteration of desi ghee in Delhi fflo:inRegion Delhi Fake ghee factory exposed in Delhi Adulteration of desi ghee prov:wasAttributedTo Jitender Singh arrests were made on a complaint of Jitender Singh1f2:Tc42,Oil’s not well? Food safety teams smell fraud thehindu.com The Russia-Ukraine war has driven up the price of edible oil in India. Suspecting that the price rise may lead to sale of adulterated or substandard edible oil, Telangana Food Safety Authority teams conducted checks at oil manufacturing units, packaging units and retail stores in the State, and collected 98 samples.
C. Sivaleela, director of the Food Safety department, which comes under Institute of Preventive Medicine, said that their teams collected edible oil samples over three days and those have been sent to the State Food Laboratory in Nacharam.
The tests are conducted to determine the acid value of oil and nature of oil among other factors. The acid value increases with age of oil. This factor is being tested based on suspicion that old oil is being packed and sold as new product.
The nature of oil is checked to find out if any oil other than those mentioned on the label has been mixed. The lab analysis will also show if the oil mentioned on the label matches the contents inside the packet.
Senior scientific officer at the State Food Laboratory, G. Laxmi Narayana Reddy said it takes 14 days to receive results. “We received the samples a few days ago. Reports will be available in 10-12 days,” said Dr. Laxmi Narayana.
“The MRP of a litre of sunflower oil was ₹155. Now the price has shot up to around ₹200,” said P. Sunil Kumar, a consumer.
Dr Sivaleela said their teams have been checking the quality of various food products. Anything that is consumed comes under the category of food — milk, bread, cake, raw materials like pulses, and fruit juices. Even packaged water and alcoholic beverages fall under the category of food.
Published - April 04, 2022 11:33 pm IST edible oil adulteration substitution old oil sampling suspected Telangana, India old oil fflo:isSubstituteFor new product suspicion that old oil is being packed and sold as new product milk fflo:belongsToCategory food Anything that is consumed comes under the category of food — milk bread fflo:belongsToCategory food category of food — milk, bread cake fflo:belongsToCategory food Anything that is consumed comes under the category of food — milk, bread, cake, raw materials like pulses, and fruit juices. pulses fflo:belongsToCategory food raw materials like pulses, and fruit juices. Even packaged water and alcoholic beverages fall under the category of food. fruit juices fflo:belongsToCategory food Anything that is consumed comes under the category of food — milk, bread, cake, raw materials like pulses, and fruit juices. packaged water fflo:belongsToCategory food Even packaged water and alcoholic beverages fall under the category of food alcoholic beverages fflo:belongsToCategory food and alcoholic beverages fall under the category of food Edible oil analysis fso:isPerformedAt State Food Laboratory in Nacharam sent to the State Food Laboratory in Nacharam oil quality analysis fso:isPerformedAt State Food Laboratory Senior scientific officer at the State Food Laboratory sunflower oil fflo:belongsToCategory food MRP of a litre of sunflower oil1f3:T6ba,Vigilance Continues Raids, Monitors Edible Oil Trade | Vijayawada News - Times of India indiatimes.com Vijayawada: Vigilance and enforcement department additional director general Dr. S Bagchi said they are continuously monitoring the sale of edible oil considering the shortage due to the war in Ukraine. He said strict action will be taken to control black market in oil sale.
Addressing a media conference here on Sunday, Bagchi said the Ukraine war has affected the supply of cooking oils.
He said vigilance conducted searches at 1,890 places in the state and registered 59 cases against traders for violation of guidelines. 
âWe have identified that a few traders are selling spurious oil and some traders are tampering with the quantity and quality. A few traders are selling for more than MRP. We are acting firm on such traders and registering cases,â Bagchi said. âWe have registered eight criminal cases against traders who are selling adulterated oil,â he added.
The legal metrology department has filed 889 cases for violation of weights and measures act.
Bagchi added that the focus will be on oil traders. edible oil adulteration substandard spurious oil registration of criminal cases alleged Vijayawada, Krishna, Andhra Pradesh, India selling spurious oil prov:wasAssociatedWith oil traders traders are selling spurious oil adulteration of oil prov:wasAssociatedWith oil traders registered eight criminal cases against traders who are selling adulterated oil registration of 8 criminal cases fflo:issuedBy Vigilance and enforcement department registered eight criminal cases against traders filing of 889 cases fflo:issuedBy Legal metrology department The legal metrology department has filed 889 cases1f4:T9f0,Visakhapatnam: Traders find new ways to strike a deal thehansindia.com Visakhapatnam: With officials giving clear instructions not to sell edible oils above than the MRP (maximum retail price), wholesale dealers are looking for newer ways to hoodwink the officials and strike a deal. To make this a reality, traders try to take advantage of the impact of the ongoing Russia-Ukraine war. In addition to hoarding a huge stock of oils in the godowns and create an artificial demand, the traders indulge in tampering with MRP stickers as well.
To keep a check on this, Vigilance and Enforcement officials conducted raids with the coordination of Legal Metrology officers at various gowdowns across the district. A large quantity of oils was seized by the authorities in the past few weeks. But with the MRP stickers being tampered, the officials concerned have intensified their raids and identified the malpractice in the traders' godowns at Kanithi Road in Gajuwaka. On Friday alone, Vigilance officers raided 16 outlets and wholesale dealers and filed nine cases against the violators.  
As a part of their raids, officials noticed that stocks were not only hoarded but the MRP stickers were also tampered at Gayatri Traders at Gajuwaka Kanithi Road. Vigilance and Enforcement ASP G Swaroopa Rani mentioned 60 tonnes of oils were seized from the godown and their MRPs were also found to be tampered. Similarly, the MRP of a 15-litre edible oil tin was replaced with Rs 3,090 label instead of its original cost Rs 2,590. Also, the manufacturing date was found to be altered. The ASP warned that the raids would continue and stringent action would be taken against the violators if they try to create artificial shortage of cooking oils or any commodity. edible oil mislabeling raid seizure case_filed suspected Visakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh, India edible oil fflo:belongsToCategory Oils 15-litre edible oil tin wholesale dealers prov:wasAssociatedWith MRP sticker tampering traders indulge in tampering with MRP stickers MRP sticker tampering fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling tampering with MRP stickers MRP sticker tampering fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional traders try to take advantage raids on godowns fflo:targets edible oils A large quantity of oils was seized MRP sticker tampering fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling MRP stickers were also tampered manufacturing date alteration prov:used edible oil manufacturing date was found to be altered manufacturing date alteration fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling manufacturing date was found to be altered1f5:Tc6d,Suspected adulterated oil thehindu.com Officials of the Food Safety Department have lifted samples of suspected adulterated groundnut and gingelly oil from a manufacturing-cum-packaging unit at Woraiyur in the city.
Following inspection carried out by a team of Food Safety officials, led by R. Ramesh Babu, Designated Officer, Food Safety and Drug Administration, at the unit on Tuesday, a stop sale order was issued on a consignment of about 1,150 litres of the two edible oil varieties. They were kept in a separate room and sealed pending further action based on test results.
According to the officials, the modus operandi was to mix palm oil with groundnut oil and rice bran oil with gingelly oil. The oils were procured from different vendors and mixed and packaged at the unit, before being marketed under a brand name. Once the lab test results were obtained, further action would be taken.
Dr. Ramesh Babu, while appealing to manufacturers and packaging units to avoid adulteration, said violations would attract stern action under the Food Safety and Standards Act 2006. In case of suspected adulteration, consumers could alert the department officials.
He indicated that the department would continue similar checks against oil manufacturing and packaging units.
On Monday, officials of the department issued a stop sale order on about 4,400 bottles of a soft drink made by a manufacturing unit at Olaiyur. The manufacturing and expiry dates on the bottles were printed using “erasable ink.” The tactic was apparently being resorted to by the manufacturer so as to easily recycle the used glass bottles, the officials said.
A notice stating that the manufacturing and expiry dates be printed with indelible ink had been issued to the owner. Similar action was taken against another unit at Somarasampettai near the city a few days ago, Dr. Ramesh Babu added.
Published - March 02, 2022 06:10 pm IST groundnut oil gingelly oil adulteration substitution dilution palm oil rice bran oil stop sale order suspected Woraiyur, India groundnut oil fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil mix palm oil with groundnut oil gingelly oil fflo:hasAdulterant rice bran oil mix palm oil with groundnut oil and rice bran oil with gingelly oil palm oil fflo:isSubstituteFor groundnut oil mix palm oil with groundnut oil rice bran oil fflo:isSubstituteFor gingelly oil mix palm oil with groundnut oil and rice bran oil with gingelly oil stop sale order fflo:targets soft drink issued a stop sale order on about 4,400 bottles of a soft drink groundnut oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod mixing palm oil modus operandi was to mix palm oil with groundnut oil gingelly oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod mixing rice bran oil with gingelly oil mix rice bran oil with gingelly oil mixing palm oil fflo:hasFraudType Dilution mix palm oil with groundnut oil mixing rice bran oil with gingelly oil fflo:hasFraudType Dilution mix rice bran oil with gingelly oil suspected adulterated groundnut oil finding fflo:foundAtStep Processing lifted samples of suspected adulterated groundnut and gingelly oil from a manufacturing-cum-packaging unit gingelly oil fflo:foundAtStep Processing manufacturing-cum-packaging unit1f6:T4e6,3 shop owners among 4 booked for selling spurious ghee indianexpress.com The Matour police booked four persons, including three shopkeepers, for selling adulterated desi ghee.
Police also recovered ghee from the shops which were being run in Matour village.
According to the police, the raid was conducted by a team of Matour police station, after receiving a complaint from Speed Search and Security agency’s Chandigarh Operations Manager Chander Sekhar.
In his complaint Chander Sekhar said that he had come to Matour village to conduct a survey for Patanjali brand and found that adulterated desi ghee of the brand was being sold at three shops in the village.
Police registered a case against three shopkeepers identified as Vijay Sachdeva, Sandeep Kumar and Taranjeet Singh, and their supplier Akash Kumar under sections 63 and 65 of the Copyrights Act. ghee adulteration booking alleged Matour, Punjab, India selling adulterated desi ghee prov:used desi ghee selling adulterated desi ghee selling adulterated desi ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith Akash Kumar their supplier Akash Kumar under sections 63 and 65 of the Copyrights Act finding adulterated desi ghee fflo:foundAtStep Retail adulterated desi ghee of the brand was being sold at three shops1f7:T4dc,Maha govt, FDA crack down on oil manufacturers to check on adulteration indiatimes.com The state department had raided a factory in Vashi area of Navi Mumbai on Tuesday, while the FDA conducted operations at units in Bhiwandi and Mira Road, the official said.
The raids were conducted based on information about adulteration of sunflower oil, which was allegedly being mixed with palm oil and sold in Mumbai and parts of Maharashtra such as Panvel, Alibaug, Raigad, among others, said Kamlesh D Kedare of the Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Protection Department.
(Catch all the Business News, Breaking News and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)
Subscribe to The Economic Times Prime and read the ET ePaper online.
(Catch all the Business News, Breaking News and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)
Subscribe to The Economic Times Prime and read the ET ePaper online. sunflower oil palm oil adulteration substitution palm oil raid suspected Mumbai, Navi Mumbai, Maharashtra, India sunflower oil fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil adulteration of sunflower oil, which was allegedly being mixed with palm oil palm oil fflo:commonIn Panvel allegedly being mixed with palm oil and sold in Mumbai and parts of Maharashtra such as Panvel1f8:T4d5,Nandini ghee adulteration racket case: Hunt on to nab prime accused: SP Chethan - Star of Mysore starofmysore.com Mysore/Mysuru: The Police are continuing their search operation to trace and nab the two absconding prime accused in the Nandini ghee adulteration racket that was busted in the outskirts of city last month, said Superintendent of Police (SP) R. Chethan.
He said that seven persons have been arrested in the case as of now and the Mysuru South Rural Police, who are investigating the case have continued their search operation to nab two prime accused, who are still at large.
The SP further said that the accused, after manufacturing the adulterated Nandini ghee, were selling the same to many shops.
Preliminary investigations have revealed that the adulterated ghee was also being sold online. The complete information regarding this will be known only after the arrest of the two prime accused, the SP added. ghee adulteration arrest search_operation alleged Mysore, Mysuru, Karnataka, India Nandini ghee adulteration racket prov:used Nandini ghee Nandini ghee adulteration racket Mysuru South Rural Police prov:wasAssociatedWith Nandini ghee adulteration racket Mysuru South Rural Police, who are investigating the case1f9:T8a7,Sale of adulterated Nandini ghee uncovered thehindu.com The Additional Director of Karnataka Milk Federation (marketing) and his team uncovered a racket involving the sale of adulterated Nandini ghee. They zeroed in on a wholesale dealer in the city who was allegedly supplying the spurious product in and around the city .
Based on the complaint by Dr. B.P. Suresh of KMF, the Basavanagudi police on Friday registered an FIR against the wholesaler, who has been charged under Section 420 (cheating) and Section 272 (adulterating food or drink intended for sale) of the Indian Penal COde and also under various sections of the Essential Commodities Act.
Dr. Suresh in his complaint said that KMF officials had raided a unit manufacturing adulterated Nandini Ghee in Hosahundi village in Nanjangud taluk on December 16. After the raid, they continued their probe into the supply chain .
The probe revealed that the unit was supplying adulterated ghee to a wholesale dealer in Bengaluru who in turn sold the spurious product to retail clients in and around the city. Some of the retail clients were in Nelamangala, Hosakote, Devanagundi , Jayanagar and Rajajinagar.
Officials along with the police raided the godowns and shops and seized the adulterated products. Samples were sent to government labs for testing. “Reports confirmed that the ghee had been adulterated,” said the police. No arrests have been made so far.
Published - January 08, 2022 11:40 pm IST ghee adulteration FIR registered lab_confirmed Bengaluru, Karnataka, India, Bengaluru, Karnataka Nandini ghee fflo:hasAdulterant unspecified adulterant Reports confirmed that the ghee had been adulterated adulteration of Nandini ghee fflo:foundAt Distribution supplying adulterated ghee to a wholesale dealer Reports confirmed that the ghee had been adulterated fflo:foundAtStep Retail sold the spurious product to retail clients ghee sample analysis fso:isPerformedAt government labs Samples were sent to government labs for testing ghee adulteration finding fflo:foundIn Nandini ghee Reports confirmed that the ghee had been adulterated ghee adulteration finding fflo:triggeredAction FIR registration Basavanagudi police on Friday registered an FIR1fa:T483,Adulterated ghee racket busted in Hyderabad, 2 held newindianexpress.com HYDERABAD: An adulterated ghee supply racket was busted by South Zone Task Force and two businessmen from Maharashtra involved in the racket were arrested. Police seized 970 litres of adulterated ghee packed in Vijaya ghee packets, which is a popular brand in Telangana.
The accused persons were identified as Deepak Penurkar who was living in Saidabad, and Rahul Agarwal who was staying in Himayatnagar. Deepak ran into financial loss due to Covid pandemic and subsequent lockdown. After that he along with one of his relatives, who is familiar with oil and ghee business, started manufacturing ghee using palmolein oil and vegetable fats in Nanded. ghee adulteration palmolein oil vegetable fats arrest seizure alleged Hyderabad, Telangana, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palmolein oil manufacturing ghee using palmolein oil ghee adulteration racket prov:wasAssociatedWith Deepak Penurkar Deepak ran into financial loss... started manufacturing ghee ghee adulteration racket prov:wasAssociatedWith Rahul Agarwal two businessmen from Maharashtra involved in the racket were arrested1fb:Tbb4,Four arrested in Nandini ghee adulteration racket case thehindu.com Four persons have been arrested in connection with the Nandini ghee adulteration racket, which was busted in Mysuru recently.
Addressing a press conference here on Tuesday, Superintendent of Mysuru district police R. Chetan said police had taken the case seriously as it involved public health and assured to complete the probe at the earliest and submit a charge-sheet to the court.
He also pointed out that a special team had been constituted for the investigation into the case and did not rule out more arrests as the probe progressed. “We have just started the investigation. We will have to question the operators of the racket and the persons, who were marketing the product. The investigation will also try to find out who were the final recipients of the product,” he said.
Mr. Chethan said the racket had begun in Hosahundi about two months ago. A total of 10 tonnes of ghee, including adulterants like vegetable cooking oil, flavouring and coloring agents, besides original Nandini brand ghee had been recovered from the godown in Hosahundi, which was raided on December 16 by activists of a human rights organisations before police took up the case and the officials of Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) seized the material and sent it to the laboratory.
Though the names of the accused was not divulged, Mr. Chethan said they have been residing in Mysuru for a long time.
The police will also investigate the role of the land owner, who had rented out the place in Hosahundi, where the adulteration racket was busted. To questions, Mr Chethan said the investigation so far showed that there is no role of Karnataka Milk Federation (KMF) employees in the racket.
It may be mentioned here that racket had caused widespread concern among the public, particularly the consumers of Nandini products. Soon after the racket came to light, the Mysuru District Co-operative Milk Producers’ Societies’ Union Limited (MYMUL) had also announced the setting up of a vigilance squad to counter the distribution of fake dairy products that were misusing the brand name of Nandini.
Published - December 29, 2021 02:36 am IST ghee adulteration vegetable cooking oil flavouring coloring agents arrest raid seizure alleged Mysuru, Karnataka, India Nandini ghee adulteration racket prov:wasAssociatedWith Four persons Four persons have been arrested in connection with the Nandini ghee adulteration racket ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable cooking oil 10 tonnes of ghee, including adulterants like vegetable cooking oil Nandini ghee adulteration racket fflo:foundAt Hosahundi racket had begun in Hosahundi Nandini ghee adulteration racket fflo:foundAtStep Storage recovered from the godown in Hosahundi Misusing Nandini brand name fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling misusing the brand name of Nandini setting up of a vigilance squad fflo:targets fake dairy products counter the distribution of fake dairy products1fc:T580,Mysuru: Four arrested in Nandini ghee racket | Mysuru News - Times of India indiatimes.com MYSURU: Nearly 12 days after locals and activists exposed a Nandini ghee adulteration racket in Hosahundi village on the city outskirts, police made a breakthrough by arresting four accused.
Police said they suspect the involvement of a few more in the racket, which was unearthed on December 16. Police had seized 10 tonnes of adulterated ghee at the time.
As the incident sent shockwaves among consumers, farmers, and other stakeholders, there was pressure on police to speed up the probe.
Superintendent of police R Chetan said a police team led by DySP Sumit arrested four persons. âAmong the arrested, two were named in the FIR itself. All four are residents of Mysuru. Based on information shared by the arrested, we will continue the probe,â he said. He hinted at more arrests in the coming days.
Meanwhile, Karnataka Rajya Raitha Sangha district president Hosuru Kumar on Tuesday demanded a CBI inquiry into the Nandini ghee adulteration case. ghee adulteration arrest alleged Mysuru, Karnataka, India Nandini ghee adulteration racket prov:used ghee Nandini ghee adulteration racket arresting four accused fflo:issuedBy police police made a breakthrough by arresting four accused Nandini ghee adulteration racket fflo:foundAt Hosahundi village exposed a Nandini ghee adulteration racket in Hosahundi village1fd:Teda,Nandini Ghee Adulteration Racket: Four arrested; Some more likely to be rounded off, says SP - Star of Mysore starofmysore.com No evidence so far about KMF or MyMUL officials being hand in glove
Mysore/Mysuru: Two weeks after the public busted a massive Nandini ghee adulteration racket at Hosahundi village at the foot of Chamundi Hill with wide inter-State ramifications, the District Police have arrested four people. More arrests will happen as the Police are digging deep into the racket, its operation, beneficiaries and the end-customers.
The racket has brought enough bad publicity to Karnataka Milk Federation (KMF) and its local unit Mysuru District Co-operative Milk Producers’ Societies’ Union Limited (MyMUL) that are known for supplying quality products for decades. It has sent shockwaves among consumers and farmers and the Police are under pressure to make the arrests.
The racket was busted on Dec. 16 and there were over 20 people working in the illegal godown at the time of the raid.
Addressing a press conference at his office yesterday, Superintendent of Police (SP) R. Chethan said that the case was being investigated by Dy.SP Sumeet. “Two of the four accused have been named in the FIR and as per the investigation so far, there is no evidence available about the involvement of KMF or MyMUL officials. We are investigating from all angles and 10 tonnes of adulterated Nandini ghee was found during the raid,” he said.
“All four are residents of Mysuru and based on information shared by the arrested, we will continue the probe,” he said, hinting at more arrests in the coming days. We have taken the case seriously as it involves public health and we will complete the probe at the earliest and submit a charge-sheet to the Court,” he said.
“A comprehensive investigation into this is underway and teams are gathering information from the building owner who rented the premises to install the illegal ghee unit. The owner too would be arrested if found guilty,” the SP added.
The racket had begun in Hosahundi about two months ago and along with 10 tonnes of ghee materials including adulterants, vegetable cooking oil, flavouring and colouring agents have been seized. “I cannot reveal the names of the arrested at this stage in the interests of investigation,” he said.
CBI probe sought
Meanwhile, Karnataka Rajya Raitha Sangha District President Hosuru Kumar demanded a CBI inquiry into the Nandini ghee adulteration case. Addressing a press conference in the city yesterday, he said that farmers under the leadership of Badagalapura Nagendra will stage a protest from 11 am to 2 pm on Dec. 30 in front of the DC’s Office demanding a CBI probe.
He noted that recently, a major milk adulteration racket was unearthed in Mandya and there has been a systematic cover-up to shield the accused. Conspiracies are underway to harm farmers’ interests, he claimed. ghee adulteration vegetable cooking oil flavouring colouring agents arrest seizure alleged Mysuru, Karnataka, India Nandini ghee adulteration racket prov:used ghee Nandini ghee adulteration racket milk adulteration racket fflo:inRegion Mandya a major milk adulteration racket was unearthed in Mandya Nandini ghee fflo:foundAt illegal godown 10 tonnes of adulterated Nandini ghee was found during the raid Nandini ghee adulteration racket fflo:occursAt illegal godown working in the illegal godown at the time of the raid ghee fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy Nandini ghee Nandini ghee adulteration racket prov:wasAssociatedWith four people District Police have arrested four people Nandini ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable cooking oil 10 tonnes of ghee materials including adulterants, vegetable cooking oil Nandini ghee adulteration case fflo:inRegion Mysuru All four are residents of Mysuru1fe:T645,MYMUL MD making false allegations against major Nandini brand ghee buyer thehansindia.com Mysuru: Mysuru City Corporation (MCC) corporator M V Ramaprasad staged a protest at Chamundipuram Circle  here on Friday accusing Mysuru Milk Union Limited (MYMUL) Managing Director B
N Vijay Kumar of spoiling the good reputation of Shri Mahalakshmi Sweets by suggesting that sweet makers were using fake  
Nandini ghee in its products. It may be recalled that a unit making spurious ghee under Nandini brand name of MYMUL was busted recently. The fake ghee was found to have been sold to many shops in Mysuru and other areas.   
According to Ramprasad, Shri Mahalakshmi Sweets is buying crores of rupees worth Nandini brand ghee every month from authorised dealers or directly from Karnataka Milk Federation (KMF). "If the shop stops purchasing Nandini ghee, it would be huge loss to MYMUL and dairy farmers.   
Kumar must be dismissed immediately for his irresponsible statement against the reputed shop in our city," he said.  
"I urge the Shri Mahalakshmi Sweets owner Shivakumar to continue using Nandini ghee to protect the interests of farmers. These accusations by an official are very suspicious though it is a well-known fact that Mahalakshmi Sweets uses Nandini ghee." ghee spurious ghee adulteration counterfeit spurious ghee protest alleged Mysuru, Karnataka, India spurious ghee fflo:isSubstituteFor Nandini ghee spurious ghee under Nandini brand name spurious ghee fflo:foundAt Retail fake ghee was found to have been sold to many shops spurious ghee fflo:commonIn Mysuru sold to many shops in Mysuru1ff:Tb61,Minister warns of attachment of properties of those involved in fake Nandini ghee racket - Star of Mysore starofmysore.com Belagavi: Days after a fake Nandini ghee racket was busted in Mysuru, Co-operation Minister S.T. Somashekar said that the properties of those involved in selling fake Nandini ghee will be confiscated by the Government.
Speaking to press persons at Suvarna Soudha in Belagavi on Monday, Somashekar, who is also Mysuru-Chamarajanagar District in-Charge Minister, said that Nandini brand products of KMF (Karnataka Milk Federation) has earned huge popularity for their purity, quality and taste. But some unscrupulous persons are out to making a quick buck by selling fake Nandini ghee, which is nothing but a crime and stern action will be taken against those trying to imitate the product, he said.
Pointing out that Nandini ghee is being supplied to Tirupati, Ayodhya and such other major religious shrines in the country, he said that the ghee is also being supplied to the Army, which itself speaks volumes about the quality of Nandini products.
Reiterating that properties of those indulged in selling fake Nandini products of KMF will be confiscated, he appealed the public to inform the KMF authorities if they come across any such fake Nandini products being sold in markets. The officials have been instructed to carry out public awareness on fake or adulterated milk products, he added.
Probe sought
Meanwhile, Manava Hakkugala Rakshane Hagu Bhrastachara Nirmoolana Samiti in Mysuru has urged the Government to carry out a thorough investigation into the fake Nandini ghee racket.
In a memorandum submitted to the Deputy Commissioner’s Office at Mysuru on Monday, the Samiti’s District President Vinod said that the members of the Samiti unearthed the racket by tipping off the Police, Food and Civil Supplies and MyMUL authorities, following which a raid was carried out, during which huge quantities of fake Nandini ghee and other products, packing materials, colouring powders and other materials that were used for adulteration were seized. But since then, nothing much is known about the progress of investigation, he claimed and sought the Government to take stern action against all the culprits who were engaged in the operation of the racket. He also urged the officials to ensure that such rackets do not spring up again. ghee adulteration counterfeit colouring powders raid seizure alleged Mysuru, Karnataka, India fake Nandini ghee fflo:hasAdulterant colouring powders huge quantities of fake Nandini ghee and other products, packing materials, colouring powders and other materials that were used for adulteration were seized fake Nandini ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod adulteration using colouring powders huge quantities of fake Nandini ghee and other products, packing materials, colouring powders and other materials that were used for adulteration were seized200:Tb14,Ghee adulteration ring busted, Karnataka Milk Federation officials reach Mysuru newindianexpress.com MYSURU: In a major catch, a ghee adulteration racket was unearthed and ghee worth lakhs of rupees was seized in the city on Thursday.
Acting on suspicion members of Human Rights Committee, an organisation led by its women committee president Yashoda and others raided a godown in Hosahundi village on the outskirts of the city, where they found 10-15 litre tins with duplicate ‘Nandini’ brand sticker having adulterated ghee.
The members found that the miscreants purchased original Nandini ghee only to mix it with dalda and low quality edible oil.
Later, they would pack the same in a 15- litre tin and reseal it. The members also recovered stickers that were printed to paste on these tins and also 1 litre packets of the ghee which were ‘duplicate’ but resembling that of the original Nandini ghee.
Karnataka Milk Federation (KMF) officials along with Mysuru South police examined the contents which were used to fill fake Nandini packets and tins to sell them.
Though the total estimate and the packets which have already been sold is not yet ascertained, senior officials including director marketing, quality controller (marketing) from Bengaluru reached on Thursday evening to get more details, informed KMF officials.
The officials further said, as per the preliminary observation, the racketeers were mainly selling the tins by pasting fake stickers of Nandini brand and also 1 litre pack of the ghee.
“Though we have adopted the hologram and QR code technology, they have managed to reproduce it. We have also received information of a similar racket in Tumakuru. Going forward, we will have strict vigilance and surveillance,” said a senior KMF official. ghee adulteration counterfeit dalda low quality edible oil seizure raid alleged Mysuru, Karnataka, India ghee adulteration racket prov:used ghee ghee adulteration racket was unearthed ghee fflo:hasAdulterant dalda mix it with dalda and low quality edible oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant low quality edible oil mix it with dalda and low quality edible oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant dalda mix it with dalda and low quality edible oil adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt godown raided a godown... where they found... adulterated ghee mixing ghee with dalda and low quality edible oil fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional miscreants purchased original Nandini ghee only to mix it dalda fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee mix it with dalda and low quality edible oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod pasting fake stickers of Nandini brand selling the tins by pasting fake stickers of Nandini brand pasting fake stickers of Nandini brand fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling pasting fake stickers of Nandini brand ghee fflo:foundAt Tumakuru received information of a similar racket in Tumakuru201:Tb5e,Mymul to set up vigilance squad to tackle fake products thehindu.com A day after a fake Nandini ghee racket was unearthed in Mysuru, the Mysuru District Co-operative Milk Producers’ Societies’ Union Limited (MYMUL) has decided to set up a vigilance squad to counter the distribution of fake dairy products misusing the Nandini brand name.
MYMUL President P.M. Prasanna told reporters in Mysuru on Friday their vigilance team, which will comprise chemists and other food experts, will visit different Nandini milk parlours and agencies to check for the purity and genuineness of the products they are selling under the brand name.
Though such a vigilance squad has to be set up by Karnataka Milk Federation (KMF), the apex body of dairy co-operatives in the State, MYMUL will deploy the vigilance squad in areas falling under its purview.
The members of the squad will also seize products at random and have them checked at the laboratory.
Mr. Prasanna said MYMUL representatives had met the Superintendent of Mysuru district police R. Chetan to conduct a detailed probe by senior officials into the racket, which was unearthed on Thursday after activists stormed a godown at Hosahundi on the outskirts of Mysuru.
A FIR has been registered against four persons, he said while hoping that the police investigation will help bring out not only all the culprits involved in the crime, but also its marketing network.
Mr. Prasanna said the fake packaging material recovered from the godown on Thursday had copied all the contents of Nandini packaging material including even the taxation numbers.
It may be mentioned here that large quantities of palm oil, vegetable cooking oil, colouring and flavouring agents, besides packaging material in the name of Nandini, which is the brand name of KMF’s dairy products, had been seized by food safety officers from the godown on Thursday.
MYMUL, in a statement, has claimed that about 3 to 4 tonnes of pure ghee had also been recovered along with 5 to 6 tonnes of adulterated ghee.
P.M. Prasad, Mysuru’s designated officer for Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), said the samples of the seized material will be sent to the laboratories for testing.
MYMUL officials also said that their directors and officials rushed to the godown after they were alerted by the members of a local human rights organisation, which had received a tip-off about the racket.
Published - December 17, 2021 06:12 pm IST ghee palm oil vegetable cooking oil adulteration counterfeit palm oil vegetable cooking oil colouring flavouring agents FIR registered vigilance squad set up seizure alleged Mysuru, Karnataka, India testing of seized material fso:isPerformedAt laboratories samples of the seized material will be sent to the laboratories for testing laboratory check fso:isPerformedOn seized products seize products at random and have them checked at the laboratory202:T12a5,Adulterated Nandini ghee racket case: Adulterated ghee has inter-State ramifications - Star of Mysore starofmysore.com Racketeers cashed-in on huge popularity of Nandini ghee
Mysore/Mysuru: The major adulterated Nandini ghee racket flourishing in Mysuru at a rented godown in Hosahundi at the foot of Chamundi Hill near Bandipalya has baffled the Police as well as the officials from the Karnataka Milk Federation (KMF) whose brand reputation has been cashed-in by criminals.
The racket was busted yesterday and a team of KMF officials and the Police raided the facility and seized tonnes of packed ghee, complete with Nandini logo, hallmark, licence number and even barcode. When held together it is difficult to distinguish between the original and adulterated packet of ghee.
Sources told Star of Mysore that the racket has inter-State ramifications and a major part of the ghee was sent to Tamil Nadu in trucks. Loads were also supplied to many sweetmeat makers of Mysuru, who used to buy the stocks in bulk.
The hugely popular Nandini brand, its health benefits and distinct texture and taste made the racketeers to adulterate the product, said KMF officials. So popular is the original ghee that it is used to make laddu at Tirumala Venkateswara Swamy Temple.
Initial investigation has revealed that the racketeers identify godowns and storage spaces outside cities like they have done in Hosahundi. They later entered into agreements with landlords in benami names and by claiming that they were dealers of genuine Nandini products.
Rent of Rs. 15,000 per month
This godown is located on Survey Number 84/6 and is owned by H.K. Vasanth Kumar and has been taken in the name of one M. Ashwini, wife of B.K. Murugesh of Mahadevapura near Srirampura. As per the rental agreement, Ashwini and Murugesh paid an advance of Rs. 1 lakh and were paying a rent of Rs. 15,000 per month.
This particular godown where the raid took place yesterday had over 20 employees filling up the packets with adulterated ghee made from vegetable oils. Every day, hundreds of packets would be manufactured and the adulterated ghee is also filled into tins that weigh 10 to 15 kgs. Thousands of such tins and cartons containing 1 litre packets have been stored in the godown.
Copy-cat machines
KMF officials and the Police suspect that the racket has been flourishing at Hosahundi since July last and till now they have already supplied ghee worth crores of rupees. Apart from people to manufacture the adulterated product, there were machines to fill the ghee to packets and seal them to make it look original.
Along with huge quantities of vegetable oil, the raiding teams also recovered original Nandini ghee that the criminals had purchased to mix it with low quality edible oil. Senior officials of KMF including Director (Marketing), Quality Controller (Marketing) from Bengaluru reached the godown last evening.
Officials said that though the KMF had adopted hologram and QR code technology to pack their premium products including ghee, the racketeers managed to reproduce them. Meanwhile, Mysuru Milk Union Chairman P.M. Prasanna said that the KMF officials and the Police would unearth the complete racket, supply route and also see if people from other States are involved.
SP R. Chethan said that a case has been booked at Mysuru South Police Station and the hunt was on to nab the kingpin of the racket. Search is on to trace all the employees of the godown and some are already being questioned, he added. Mysuru District Minister S.T. Somashekar has directed the Police and the KMF authorities to get to the root of the racket and restore the faith of people in the Nandini brand. ghee adulteration counterfeit vegetable oil edible oil raid case booked alleged Mysuru, Karnataka, India adulterated ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable oils adulterated ghee made from vegetable oils adulterated ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable oils adulterated ghee made from vegetable oils Nandini ghee fflo:hasAdulterant low quality edible oil original Nandini ghee that the criminals had purchased to mix it with low quality edible oil case booked fflo:issuedBy Mysuru South Police Station case has been booked at Mysuru South Police Station adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt Hosahundi flourishing in Mysuru at a rented godown in Hosahundi adulterated ghee fflo:isSubstituteFor Nandini ghee difficult to distinguish between the original and adulterated packet ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod packaging with Nandini logo complete with Nandini logo, hallmark, licence number and even barcode ghee mislabeling fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling complete with Nandini logo, hallmark, licence number and even barcode adulterated ghee fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional racketeers cashed-in on huge popularity203:Tdae,Racket selling adulterated Nandini ghee busted - Star of Mysore starofmysore.com Mysore/Mysuru: A racket that manufactured and distributed adulterated Nandini brand ghee of Karnataka Milk Federation (KMF) has been busted in the city this morning and the godown has been raided.
KMF officials and Mysuru South Police are conducting the raids and are examining the contents that have been stored in 10 to 15 litre tins in the godown. Police said that the racketeers used low quality edible oils to adulterate the ghee, filled it in fake Nandini packets and sold them.
The raid was conducted based on a tip off at Hosahundi village at the foot of Chamundi Hill and tonnes of adulterated ghee worth crores of rupees have been recovered. The exact estimate will be known only after the cans, tins and packets stored in the godown are measured.
Police said that it is an organised racket that mixed vegetable ghee & oil, oil coloured with turmeric to make it look like authentic Nandini ghee.
Aware that Nandini ghee had a huge market, the racket flourished since the last four to five months and the racketeers had established their own network of supplies across the city and had contacts with regular retail and wholesale buyers, the Police said. KMF outlets sell only Nandini brand products.
The tip off was provided by one Pradeep and when teams arrived at the godown, it was locked from outside while a couple of people were filling adulterated ghee into packets that had Nandini brand printed on it. The shutters of the godown were forcibly opened.
During the raid it was discovered that the racketeers had procured the Nandini labels and logo in bundles, stamps and seals and printed the packets to make it look original. A machine was used to fill the adulterated ghee to the packets and they were stored in cardboard boxes.
KMF (Mysuru Milk Union) Managing Director B.N. Vijay Kumar and team and the Mysuru South Police visited the spot and are examining the seized stocks. ghee adulteration counterfeit oil coloured with turmeric raid seizure alleged Mysore, Mysuru, Karnataka, India Nandini ghee fflo:hasAdulterant oil coloured with turmeric oil coloured with turmeric to make it look like authentic Nandini ghee adulterated ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod filling into fake Nandini packets filling adulterated ghee into packets that had Nandini brand printed on it Nandini ghee fflo:hasAdulterant low quality edible oils racketeers used low quality edible oils to adulterate the ghee Nandini ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vegetable ghee mixed vegetable ghee & oil Mixing low quality edible oils into Nandini ghee fflo:hasFraudType Substitution racketeers used low quality edible oils to adulterate the ghee Mixing low quality edible oils and fake packaging fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling filled it in fake Nandini packets Mixing vegetable ghee and oil fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional organised racket that mixed vegetable ghee Adulterated Nandini ghee fflo:foundAt Storage contents that have been stored in 10 to 15 litre tins in the godown Nandini ghee fflo:belongsToCategory Dairy Nandini brand ghee of Karnataka Milk Federation filling into fake Nandini packets fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling printed the packets to make it look original filling into fake Nandini packets fflo:hasFraudType Substitution filling adulterated ghee into packets that had Nandini brand printed on it Nandini labels and logo fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling procured the Nandini labels and logo in bundles, stamps and seals204:T1833,185 spurious mustard oil cans seized in Burrabazar | Kolkata News - Times of India indiatimes.com KOLKATA: The enforcement branch has raided the premises of three edible oil traders in the Posta region after receiving complaints that they were blending rice bran oil with deadly dyes and chemicals and repacking them as mustard oil and selling them at Rs 160 per litre, almost Rs 30-Rs 60 less than the market rate. The government has banned blending of mustard oil since July earlier this year.
The EB have seized huge stocks of adulterated mustard oil from three godowns in Burrabazar.
The adulteration was being carried out at special anti-chambers set up inside the godown, suspect investigators. âWe have collected the samples and sent them for testing. The accused wanted to cash in on the mustard oil price rise and were making a nice profit by using sub-standard products,â said Bidisha Kalita, DC (EB).
According to police, it was around two days back that officers from the enforcement branch carried out a special drive against blended mustard oil based on inputs from various sources. âSamples from each accused were collected after we came to know that they were selling adulterated oil at anywhere between Rs 160-Rs 165 per litre, which is not possible at present market rates if it was pure. We even found underground chambers at each godown. We suspect that mustard oil was adulterated by the accused by mixing essence, colour and low-rate-low-quality rice bran oil. This is subject to the chemical report that we are waiting for. We believe this oil was sold in bulk in the open market,â said an officer.
âOfficers from our food & edible oil section reached godowns at Strand Road where search and seizure were made at three shops and office-cum-godowns. We detained one Bikram Goel (45). As many as 105 tins filled with loose mustard oil (each tin 15 kgs) and 32 empty tins were seized from him. We also detained one Bidyut Nandi (42) and seized 35 tins filled with loose mustard oil and 15 empty tins. Manik Porel(55) was the third person to be detained. We detained 45 tins filled with loose mustard oil and 12 empty tins from Porel,â said Kalita.
The development comes at a time when the central government announced in October that it will push for more domestic rice bran oil production to counter the inflation in edible oil prices across the country. The country is witnessing record-high inflation in food prices, including in edible oils, pulses, meat and eggs, in addition to skyrocketing fuel prices. 
According to multiple studies in Kolkata, the commonly found adulterants from the chemical analysis of edible oil were found to be argemone oil, mineral oil, karanja oil and cyanide. The level of adulteration was found to be higher in unpackaged samples of mustard and soybean oil and absent in coconut oil.
Studies have also stated that adulteration was commonly practised in non-branded foods. âIncrease in consumer awareness would enable careful selection of ingredients, thereby further aiding in maintenance of good health,â a study titled âAdulteration in commonly used cooking oils of Kolkata: Evaluation of consumer perception and detection of adulterantsâ and published at the International Journal of Health Sciences & Research has recently stated. mustard oil adulteration substitution rice bran oil raid seizure detention suspected Kolkata, West Bengal, India mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant rice bran oil blending rice bran oil with deadly dyes and chemicals and repacking them as mustard oil rice bran oil fflo:isSubstituteFor mustard oil blending rice bran oil with deadly dyes and chemicals and repacking them as mustard oil mustard oil fflo:belongsToCategory Oils mustard oil argemone oil fflo:commonIn Kolkata According to multiple studies in Kolkata, the commonly found adulterants from the chemical analysis of edible oil were found to be argemone oil mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant dyes blending rice bran oil with deadly dyes and chemicals mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant chemicals blending rice bran oil with deadly dyes and chemicals blending rice bran oil with deadly dyes and chemicals prov:wasAssociatedWith edible oil traders blending rice bran oil with deadly dyes and chemicals blending rice bran oil with deadly dyes and chemicals fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional accused wanted to cash in on the mustard oil price rise mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterationMethod blending rice bran oil with dyes and chemicals blending rice bran oil with deadly dyes and chemicals blending rice bran oil with deadly dyes and chemicals fflo:hasFraudType Substitution blending rice bran oil with deadly dyes and chemicals mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant rice bran oil mixing essence, colour and low-rate-low-quality rice bran oil mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant essence mixing essence, colour and low-rate-low-quality rice bran oil mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant colour mixing essence, colour and low-rate-low-quality rice bran oil adulteration of mustard oil prov:wasAssociatedWith Bidyut Nandi We also detained one Bidyut Nandi (42) and seized 35 tins filled with loose mustard oil adulteration of mustard oil prov:wasAssociatedWith Manik Porel Manik Porel(55) was the third person to be detained mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant rice bran oil mixing essence, colour and low-rate-low-quality rice bran oil Adulterated mustard oil finding fflo:foundAtStep Retail search and seizure were made at three shops Adulterated mustard oil seizure fflo:foundAtStep Storage search and seizure were made at three shops and office-cum-godowns mineral oil fflo:commonIn Kolkata commonly found adulterants from the chemical analysis of edible oil were found to be argemone oil, mineral oil karanja oil fflo:commonIn Kolkata commonly found adulterants from the chemical analysis of edible oil were found to be argemone oil, mineral oil, karanja oil and cyanide cyanide fflo:commonIn Kolkata commonly found adulterants from the chemical analysis of edible oil were found to be argemone oil, mineral oil, karanja oil and cyanide soybean oil fflo:hasAdulterant argemone oil level of adulteration was found to be higher in unpackaged samples of mustard and soybean oil205:T77e,Tribunal slaps Rs 2 lakh fine on oil producer newindianexpress.com THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: The Food Safety Appellate Tribunal here has upheld the Rs 2-lakh fine that was imposed on a coconut oil manufacturer for selling substandard oil. The order was issued by judge S Sajikumar. The case pertaining to the verdict occurred in 2020 at Kunnathunadu panchayat in Ernakulam.
The oil sample collected from Kairali Traders by Food Safety Officer Neethu Nadir was found to be of low quality. A case was filed against Kairali Traders and Distributors Liya Traders before Muvattupuzha Adjudication Officer T Anil Kumar. Subsequently, Kairali Traders was ordered to pay a fine of Rs 2 lakh.
Kairali traders filed an appeal before the tribunal. The defence counsel argued that during the time of the offence, the licence of Kairali Traders was invalid and the samples were taken without following food safety rules.
Additional government pleader M Salahudeen, who appeared for the Food Safety Department countered this and argued that the company had a valid licence. coconut oil substandard Rs 2 lakh fine unclear Kunnathunadu panchayat, Ernakulam, Kerala, India IncidentFinding: Coconut Oil Substandard fflo:foundIn coconut oil coconut oil manufacturer for selling substandard oil IncidentFinding: Coconut Oil Substandard fflo:triggeredAction RegulatoryAction: Rs 2 lakh fine The Food Safety Appellate Tribunal here has upheld the Rs 2-lakh fine that was imposed on a coconut oil manufacturer for selling substandard oil RegulatoryAction: Rs 2 lakh fine fflo:issuedBy Food Safety Appellate Tribunal The Food Safety Appellate Tribunal here has upheld the Rs 2-lakh fine IncidentFinding: Coconut Oil Substandard fflo:inRegion Kunnathunadu panchayat case pertaining to the verdict occurred in 2020 at Kunnathunadu panchayat RegulatoryAction: Rs 2 lakh fine fflo:targets coconut oil fine that was imposed on a coconut oil manufacturer206:T64d,FDA urges caution while buying Diwali sweets indiatimes.com Kolhapur: The Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) has urged citizens to be on the alert while purchasing and consuming snacks and sweets during 
Diwali.The FDA said it would conduct a campaign against those found making or selling adulterated products.
On Monday, the FDA raided two shops in Sangli and seized items worth more than Rs2 lakh.“Stock worth Rs 1.7 lakh was seized from a shop at Madhavnagar in Sangli, while cooking oil worth Rs61, 950 was seized from the MIDC Kupwad area, under the Food Safety and Standards Act.
Further action will be taken once the report of the samples collected from these stores is received from the lab,” FDA assistant commissioner S A Chougule said.
He also advised against milk-based products from roadside vendors, and those kept in the open. Sweets made from khoya (mawa) should be consumed within 24 hours. Sweets should be consumed within 8-10 hours. If any fungus is found, then the item should not be consumed, he said.
“If people in Sangli want to lodge complaint about food quality, they can contact 0233-2602202/2602201. FDA will continue the campaign against food adulteration during Diwali,” he added. cooking oil adulteration substandard raid seizure suspected Sangli, Maharashtra, India Sweets fkg:hasIngredient khoya Sweets made from khoya (mawa) raid on two shops in Sangli fflo:issuedBy Food and Drugs Administration FDA raided two shops in Sangli lab analysis fso:isPerformedOn samples collected from these stores report of the samples collected from these stores is received from the lab207:T1003,Rajasthan: Fatty acid profile new test to check spurious ghee | Jaipur News - Times of India indiatimes.com JAIPUR: Miscreants producing adulterated desi ghee using vanaspati oil are selling their product in very cheap prices ranging from Rs 250-350 per litre. They have become notorious as they use certain chemicals which help them maintaining the values of butyro refractometer (BR) and Reichert Meissl (RM) which matches the BR and RM values of good quality desi ghee.
The health departmentâs laboratories check BR and RM values of the sample collected from the market for quality check of the ghee. Even the adulterated ghee passes the BR and RM value test and the firms involve in adulteration escape easily without any action. The BR value should be in the range of 40 to 43 and the RM value should be minimum 26 as per the food safety and standards (food products standards and food additive) regulations 2011. The firms producing the adulterated ghee using vanaspati oil use certain type of chemicals. When such samples are tested, the RM and BR values matches of ghee made of milk.
For countering the malpractice, the health department has made fatty acid profile test compulsory of the ghee samples. One of the samples which pass the BR and RM value test failed in fatty acid profile test.
The report of the test reads, âFatty acid profile of sample does not match the fatty acid profile of ghee.â
The same sample passed the RM and BR value test. As RM value was 30 and BR value was 42 which matches to the valves of ghee produced from milk.
âFatty acid profile is an effective way of identifying foreign fat in ghee. The fatty acids in milk is different from the fatty acid in Vanaspati ghee. The fatty acid profile is an effective test which helps in identifying the foreign fat in adulterated desi ghee,â said, Prakash Chandwani, a food safety officer in Ajmer district.
On October 12, chief analyst (food) Pankaj Midda, took up the issue of adulterated ghee samples passing in quality test on the basis on RM and BR valves. But, they failed in fatty acid profile test. He directed all the food safety officers to get the fatty acid profile done of all the samples of ghee collected from the market for quality test.
According to the sources, the fatty acid profile test is available at the government lab in Jaipur, but the health department is making efforts to start the test in other government labs of the state. ghee adulteration vanaspati oil mandatory fatty acid profile test alleged Jaipur, Ajmer, Rajasthan, India desi ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vanaspati oil Miscreants producing adulterated desi ghee using vanaspati oil vanaspati oil fflo:isSubstituteFor desi ghee producing adulterated desi ghee using vanaspati oil ghee sample fflo:collectedAt market sample collected from the market for quality check of the ghee fatty acid profile test fflo:producesIndicator fatty acid profile mismatch Fatty acid profile of sample does not match the fatty acid profile of ghee desi ghee fflo:hasPermissibleLimit BR value limit 40-43 BR value should be in the range of 40 to 43 desi ghee fflo:hasPermissibleLimit RM value limit min 26 RM value should be minimum 26 BR value limit 40-43 fflo:specifiedIn food safety and standards (food products standards and food additive) regulations 2011 as per the food safety and standards (food products standards and food additive) regulations 2011 RM value limit min 26 fflo:specifiedIn food safety and standards (food products standards and food additive) regulations 2011 as per the food safety and standards (food products standards and food additive) regulations 2011 adulterated desi ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod chemical masking of BR and RM values use certain chemicals which help them maintaining the values of butyro refractometer (BR) and Reichert Meissl (RM) chemical masking of BR and RM values fflo:hasFraudType Masking use certain chemicals which help them maintaining the values of butyro refractometer (BR) and Reichert Meissl (RM) desi ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vanaspati oil identifying foreign fat in adulterated desi ghee208:T462,Indore: In ongoing war against adulteration, 3K lt edible oil seized from two units freepressjournal.in Indore
A joint team of Crime Branch and Food and Civil Supply department raided two oil packaging units in Palda area on suspicion that they were adulterating edibile oil. In all 3,000 litres of oil was seized from the two units.
The crime branch received a tip off that adulterated edibile was being supplied by M/s Atharva Enterprises and Chirag Enterprises. Both the units are owned by Manoj Jain.
The team also seized 294 litres of oil packets worth Rs 38,320.
Officials said that samples have been sent for examinationand if they are found to be adulterated, further action would be taken. edible oil adulteration raid seizure suspected Indore, Madhya Pradesh, India suspected adulteration of edible oil prov:wasAssociatedWith Manoj Jain Both the units are owned by Manoj Jain suspected adulteration of edible oil prov:wasAssociatedWith M/s Atharva Enterprises adulterated edibile was being supplied by M/s Atharva Enterprises examination fso:isPerformedOn edible oil sample samples have been sent for examination209:Tbc9,With pics - Arsh – FCS + FCS2 STRAP: Drive against ‘adulteration mafia’ in Indore: District FCS raids edible oil factory, petrol pump freepressjournal.in Indore: A team of the District Food and Civil Supply led by additional collector Abhay Bedekar, in a drive against ‘adulteration mafia’, conducted two drives in two areas under the Indore department jurisdiction on Saturday.
In one drive, conducted by the department along with the Crime Branch Department, over 3,550 litres of sub-standard oil was seized from the firm, Mamaji Industries, in the Palda area. The Crime Branch received a tip, following which the drive was conducted. In the drive, the operator of the industry, Ashok Agrawal, was found carrying out fraudulent activities by repackaging several types of oils in new bottles by adulterating the oil. The department took the samples of the oils and seized the entire material present in the factory.
Officials said they found that the company repackaged mustard, groundnut and soybean oil with its own brand, Morena Gold Kachi Ghani Oil, Active Live Soyabean Oil, Sun Active Sunflower Oil, Mamaji Groundnut Oil and Kathiabadi Groundnut. The repackaged oil packets were sent to dealers in Ujjain, Dewas, Khargone, Dhar and Indore.
In another drive, the team of the department raided Hans Travel’s petrol pump near Dhakkanwala Kuwa. The pump was selling biodiesel without permission. The team took samples of the petrol and diesel. Additional collector Bedekar said that a bio-diesel licence was required to carry out such activities. Action is being taken against those who are trading in it without a proper licence. Samples have been taken from the pump and action will be taken if issues were found with the samples.
Case registered against Go Gas owner
An FIR has been registered against four people in the Go Gas godown case in which gas was stored above the permissible quantity. The case has been registered against the agency’s territory manager, Ashok Soni, godown-in-charge Suraj Choudhary, godown keeper Lakhan and Sunil Solanki at the Rajendra Nagar police station. edible oil mustard oil groundnut oil soybean oil sunflower oil adulteration substandard mislabeling seizure raid suspected Indore, Madhya Pradesh, India Adulteration at Mamaji Industries prov:wasAssociatedWith Ashok Agrawal operator of the industry, Ashok Agrawal, was found carrying out fraudulent activities Adulteration at Mamaji Industries prov:used mustard oil repackaged mustard, groundnut and soybean oil Adulteration at Mamaji Industries prov:used groundnut oil repackaged mustard, groundnut and soybean oil Adulteration at Mamaji Industries prov:used soybean oil repackaged mustard, groundnut and soybean oil Adulteration at Mamaji Industries prov:used sunflower oil Sun Active Sunflower Oil Repackaging with adulteration fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling repackaging several types of oils in new bottles Repackaging with adulteration fflo:hasIntentionality Intentional carrying out fraudulent activities20a:Ta8b,Madhya Pradesh: Expired ghee, tea leafs worth over Rs 8 lakh seized, manager and owner booked freepressjournal.in Indore (Madhya Pradesh): Continuing the action against spurious edibles, a joint team of Crime Branch and Food and Drug Administration Department raided Tradezo Company’s godown at Lasudia Mori and seized over 656 kilogram of ghee, on Wednesday night.
The company was repacking the expired ghee of Society Company. The team also seized over 2200 kilogram sub-standard tea leaves worth Rs 4 lakh.
According to Additional Superintendent of Police (Crime) Guruprasad Parashar, acting on tip off, a joint team raided the godown of Tradezo Company where expired ghee of Society Company was kept for repacking.
“Ghee of about Rs 3-5 lakh was stored and it was found that the company had called expired ghee from Mumbai and was repacking it with the new expiry date and label. In preliminary investigation, it was found that the Tradezo Company’s in-charge Shailendra Shrivastava and firm license owner Hitesh Bhatiya were putting public health in danger by changing the label of expired ghee packets and by selling substandard and misbranded tea leafs,” the ASP said.
A case under section 420, 272, 273, and 32 of IPC was registered against the accused at Lasudia Police Station.
According to food safety officer DK Soni, “The action was taken following the previous action on Shree Ram Food and Milk Industry where 4200 kilogram ghee was seized. During the police investigation, the accused informed them that they had got the supply of ghee from Tradezo Company for repacking.”
Food safety officers have also taken samples of Society Desi Ghee, Society Amar Dust Tea, Society Masala Flavour Tea, and Society Tea.
“Charges would be increased on the accused on the basis of sample reports,” Soni said. ghee adulteration mislabeling substandard seizure case registration alleged Indore, Madhya Pradesh, India Repacking expired ghee prov:used ghee repacking the expired ghee Repacking expired ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith Tradezo Company company was repacking the expired ghee Repacking expired ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith Hitesh Bhatiya firm license owner Hitesh Bhatiya ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod repacking with new expiry date and label repacking it with the new expiry date and label Changing expiry date and label fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling changing the label of expired ghee packets Selling substandard tea leaves prov:used tea leaves seized over 2200 kilogram sub-standard tea leaves tea leaves fflo:hasAdulterationMethod Misbranding tea leaves selling substandard and misbranded tea leafs Misbranding tea leaves fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling misbranded tea leafs20b:T724,Indore: Sub-standard ghee, tea leaves seized freepressjournal.in Indore: A joint team of the Crime Branch and Food and Drug Administration Department raided the Shri Ram Food Dairy Industry in Palda and seized over 4,200 kilogram of sub-standard ghee worth Rs 18-20 lakh on Tuesday. The team also seized sub-standard tea leaves weighing about 4,100 kilograms worth Rs 7 lakh.
Additional superintendent of police (crime) Guru Prasad Parashar said, “The accused were buying expired ghee of various companies and were repacking it under the brand name Mother’s Choice.” He said that the action was taken on a tip that the accused were buying expired ghee from Maharashtra and Gujarat and were selling it in various districts of Madhya Pradesh, including Ratlam, Neemuch, Bhopal, Shujalpur, Maksi, Jabalpur, Mandsaur and Ashok Nagar, besides Maharashtra’s Akola and Nagpur.
“Two firms, including Shri Ram Milk Food Dairy Industry and Laxmi Narayana Company, were running on the same premises. Accused Narendra Gupta and Manju Agrawal were booked under sections 272, 273, 34 of the IPC by the Bhanwarkuan police station," Parashar said.
The Food and Drug Administration department has taken samples of different types of ghee to be sent for testing. ghee adulteration mislabeling expired ghee raid seizure booking under IPC alleged Indore, Madhya Pradesh, India repacking expired ghee prov:used ghee buying expired ghee of various companies and were repacking it repacking expired ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith Shri Ram Food Dairy Industry accused were buying expired ghee ... and were repacking it repacking expired ghee prov:wasAssociatedWith Narendra Gupta The accused were buying expired ghee ... and were repacking it repacking expired ghee fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling repacking it under the brand name Mother's Choice20c:T8d3,Kurnool police arrest five member gang involved in selling fake oils and tea powders using fake labels of top FMCGs indiatimes.com TIRUPATI: Kurnool district police wing busted a five member gang involved in selling spurious products in large quantities using fake labels on Monday. The gang was involved in selling away fake coconut oils and tea powders using fake labels of top FMCGs. 
Briefing reporters about the arrests, Kurnool SP CH Sudheer Kumar Reddy said the key accused identified as Kamal Bhati, a resident of Kachiguda in Hyderabad along with his key aide identified as Sanjay of Moosapeta got into the business of selling fake coconut oils and tea powders using fake labels and identical packaging of top FMCGs. 
The duo who appointed distributors in the seven states of Andhra Pradesh, 
Telangana, 
Karnataka, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and Rajasthan, have been selling large quantities of fake coconut oils and tea powders to the public in these states. 
Following a complaint lodged by Soma Sundaram who is an authorized distributor for Marico's Parachute coconut oil at Bengaluru on August 27, the Nandikotkur police who took up a detailed investigation into the case arrested five persons including Kamal Bhati (46), Sanjay (40), D Satyanarayana (49), T Ravi Kumar (46), Sheik Khader Basha (46). 
Nandikotkur police seized 14880 fake coconut oil bottles, 5160 empty bottles, 1680 fake tea powder packets, 41400 empty tea powder packets along with various machinery and equipment. 
Police have registered a case under section 420 IPC and sec 51 (B) (1) R/W 63 of the Copyright Act of 1957 and Sec 103 and 104 of the Trademarks Act of 1999 r/w 34 IPC. coconut oil counterfeit mislabeling arrest seizure case registration alleged Kurnool, Andhra Pradesh, India fake coconut oil and tea powder sale prov:used coconut oil selling fake coconut oils and tea powders fake coconut oil and tea powder sale prov:used tea powder selling fake coconut oils and tea powders using fake labels fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling using fake labels of top FMCGs fake coconut oil and tea powder sale fflo:occursAt Distribution appointed distributors in the seven states case registration fflo:issuedBy Nandikotkur police Police have registered a case20d:T546,Three of family die of dropsy over 10 days indiatimes.com Palanpur: Three out of seven members of a family who had suffered from food poisoning last month in Kundi village of Dhanera have died over the last 10 days, said medical officer of Banaskantha on Thursday.
Epidemic medical officer of Banaskantha, Dr N K Garg said that deaths were due to dropsy which was likely caused by consumption of adulterated mustard oil.
“One died on July 22, second death was on Tuesday and the third person succumbed on Wednesday,” Garg said.
The deceased have been identified as Chagan Paliwad (54), his son Naveen Paliwad (24) and daughter Daksha Paliwad (18).
Two of the deceased were admitted to a private hospital in Dhanera while one breathed his last in Palanpur. Four other members of the family are undergoing treatment in Ahmedabad and are said to be out of danger.
A team of Dharpur Medical College, Patan, had visited the family last month the food poisoning incident. mustard oil adulteration unsafe_food adulterated mustard oil suspected Palanpur, Banaskantha, Gujarat, India adulterated mustard oil fflo:causesEffect dropsy deaths were due to dropsy which was likely caused by consumption of adulterated mustard oil food poisoning incident fflo:inRegion Kundi village of Dhanera suffered from food poisoning last month in Kundi village of Dhanera20e:T113c,Indore: Edible oil worth Rs 9.90L seized from Palda area, 11 samples taken from factory freepressjournal.in Indore: A team of food and drug administration department conducted a surprise inspection of an edible oil repacking factory in the Palda area on Friday and found that the FSSAI number of the oil, imported from Nepal, was incorrect. The team seized edible oil worth Rs 9.90L.
The drug administration team carried out a surprise inspection of the factory called Mahendra Brothers located in Palda area on Friday afternoon. The team members took 11 samples of various food items from the factory. One of the owners of the firm Mahesh Gulwani was also present on the spot when the team of officials reached there.
The samples of the oil taken include Gold Refined Soybean Oil 500ml, MP No. One Refined Soybean Oil 400ml, Flavour Gold Refined Soybean Oil 5 Litre, Flavour Gold Refined Soybean Oil 15 Litre, MP No. 1 Refined Sunflower Oil 15 Litre, Sagar Gold Refined Palmolein Oil 500ml,
Healthy King Refined Soybean Oil, Samples of Surya Coconut Oil, Halo Refined Sunflower Oil, Siddha Baba Refined Soyabean Oil and Halo Refined Soyabean Oil 15 KG. The samples were taken under Food Safety and Standards Act 2006.
Besides this, the team also confiscated Surya Coconut Oil 2205 kg, Halo Refined Sunflower Oil (1 lit pouch) 2000 lit., Halo Refined Soyabean Oil (15 lit tin) 2175 lit. The total value of the confiscated oil is estimated Rs 9,90,925. This action was also carried out under the Food Safety and Standards Act 2006. The confiscated items were kept in the custody of the firm itself. Surya Coconut Oil, Halo Refined Sunflower Oil, Siddha Baba Refined Soyabean Oil, Halo Refined Soyabean Oil 15 kg were found to be manufactured in Nepal and imported into the country. Interestingly the importer's license number was found to be in 12 digits, whereas the license issued by FSSAI New Delhi is a 14 digit number.
Indore: Edible oil worth Rs 9.90L seized from Palda area, 11 samples taken from factory
RECENT STORIES
                        
                            Train Update! Four West Central Railway Trains Diverted Due To Third Line Commissioning Work
                            
                                
                            
                        
                    
                        
                            One Exam, One Last Chance: 16.5k Madhya Pradesh Students To Take CBSE Supplementary Test On July 15
                            
                                
                            
                        
                    
                        
                            Malwa’s Famous Garadu And Sailana Balam Cucumber Earn GI Recognition
                            
                                
                            
                        
                    
                        
                            'To Hamari Banayi Sadak Par Mat Chalo,' Says Urban Minister Kailash Vijayvargiya Over 'Qafir' Remark...
                            
                                
                            
                        
                    
                        
                            President Draupadi Murmu Concludes Five-Day Madhya Pradesh Visit; Chief Minister Mohan Yadav Bids He... edible oil surya coconut oil halo refined sunflower oil halo refined soyabean oil siddha baba refined soyabean oil mislabeling substandard seizure inspection suspected Indore, Madhya Pradesh, India Gold Refined Soybean Oil fflo:belongsToCategory Edible Oils Gold Refined Soybean Oil 500ml MP No. One Refined Soybean Oil fflo:belongsToCategory Edible Oils MP No. One Refined Soybean Oil 400ml Flavour Gold Refined Soybean Oil fflo:belongsToCategory Edible Oils Flavour Gold Refined Soybean Oil 5 Litre MP No. 1 Refined Sunflower Oil fflo:belongsToCategory Edible Oils MP No. 1 Refined Sunflower Oil 15 Litre Sagar Gold Refined Palmolein Oil fflo:belongsToCategory Edible Oils Sagar Gold Refined Palmolein Oil 500ml Healthy King Refined Soybean Oil fflo:belongsToCategory Edible Oils Healthy King Refined Soybean Oil Surya Coconut Oil fflo:belongsToCategory Edible Oils Samples of Surya Coconut Oil Halo Refined Sunflower Oil fflo:belongsToCategory Edible Oils Halo Refined Sunflower Oil Surya Coconut Oil fflo:foundAtStep Import Surya Coconut Oil ... were found to be manufactured in Nepal and imported20f:Td07,Madhya Pradesh: Pulse mills, hotels and grocery shops inspected; samples collected for testing freepressjournal.in Guna: District administration Guna, a joint team of food and revenue department conducted raids on big hotels and factories of Guna city on Friday.
The team inspected Sanjay Dal Mill, Ved Dal Mill and Deepak Dal Mill in the industrial area and took samples dal for testing.
The team inspected Hotel Rajvilas, Hotel GK, and kitchen of Jain Garden and The Grand Kasturi and took samples of food items like paneer, soybean oil, flour for testing.
Another team of the fooda, municipality and revenue department conducted a drive in Aron Tehsil.
The team got the contaminated and expired food items from grocery shops, and destroyed them along with the and took samples of namkeen for investigation.
The team destroyed 41 packets of expired namkeen, 6 packets of toast, 7 packets of chilli powder, one packet of soybean oil were found at Banjhal grocery, 30 packets of namkeen found at RomilKirana, 10 packets of chilli powder, found at Nehru grocery, 10 packets of namkeen found at Roshan grocery and 25 packets of namkeen found at Mahavir grocery.
Food officer Manoj Raghuvanshi said that the packets of food items at these shops were found to have passed best before date.
Food traders were directed by the food safety officers to keep and sell high quality pure food items for human consumption. All the samples taken for testing have been sent to the food analyst, State Food Testing Laboratory, Bhopal. Further legal action will be taken on receipt of the reports.
‘Bad’ cooking oil destroyed
Barwani: A team of district Food and Drug Administration collected samples of food items from grocery shops and hotels in the Bus stand, Jhanda Chowk and Karanja area. Fifty one samples of pulses, cooking oil, and ground spices were tested at Food Testing Laboratory. The TPM value of cooking oil used in 02 hotels was found to be more than the standard level. It was destroyed on the spot. Food safety officer Pankaj Anchal said that the division level mobile food testing laboratory will visit in all the sub-divisions of the district. Its purpose is to provide information about the quality of the food items being used by the general public and shopkeepers and in case of shortage, issue correction notices to the shopkeepers and get the deficiencies removed. Food safety officer Pankaj Anchal, Velsingh Mori, Premlata Bhavar and lab technician Neeraj Prajapat were present. cooking oil substandard contamination total polar materials destroyed pending_test Barwani, Madhya Pradesh, India Testing of pulses, cooking oil, and ground spices fso:isPerformedAt Food Testing Laboratory Fifty one samples of pulses, cooking oil, and ground spices were tested at Food Testing Laboratory. chilli powder fflo:foundAt Nehru grocery 10 packets of chilli powder, found at Nehru grocery Analysis of food samples fso:isPerformedAt State Food Testing Laboratory, Bhopal All the samples taken for testing have been sent to the food analyst, State Food Testing Laboratory, Bhopal. cooking oil fflo:hasAdulterant high TPM The TPM value of cooking oil used in 02 hotels was found to be more than the standard level. high TPM fflo:foundAt Retail The TPM value of cooking oil used in 02 hotels was found to be more than the standard level.210:T5ba,Epidemic dropsy claims two lives in Gujarat's Banaskantha indiatimes.com PALANPUR: Two women died and six others of their family fell ill reportedly after consuming adulterated mustard oil in Gundri village of Banaskantha’s Dantiwada taluka. 
 All of them are suspected to have suffered from epidemic dropsy, a clinical condition caused due to consumption of contaminated oil. 
According to epidemic medical officer N K Garg, one 22-year-old woman died on Tuesday while a 19-year-old succumbed on Thursday. 
Their blood samples have been sent to National Institute of Occupational Health (NIOH) in Ahmedabad for further investigation. A team of paramedical staff led by a medical officer has been camping in the village to strictly observe the possibility of further spread of disease. The affected people are being treated.
The oils are adulterated using argemone oil which contains toxic alkaloids sanguinarine and dihydrosanguinarine. Dropsy or oedema results in severe fluid retention in the body which causes diarrhoea and other complications. mustard oil adulteration contamination medical observation suspected Gundri, Banaskantha, Gujarat, India mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant argemone oil oils are adulterated using argemone oil epidemic dropsy fflo:hasDefinition severe fluid retention in the body which causes diarrhoea and other complications Dropsy or oedema results in severe fluid retention in the body which causes diarrhoea and other complications211:T809,Nagpur: Adulterated edible oil racket busted, 3 booked | Nagpur News - Times of India indiatimes.com NAGPUR: Tehsil police on Tuesday busted an adulterated edible oil manufacturing unit and booked three persons in this connection. 
The cops led by senior PI Jayesh Bhandarkar also seized a huge quantity of adulterated oil being marketed by labelling it as a product by reputed brands.
During the raid, police found around 28 15-litre tins of impure edible oil, fake stickers and other material.
The police have booked three â Prem Gagwani (58, a resident of Badkas Chowk, Mahal), Shankar Durugkar (47, a resident of Hiwri Nagar) and Ashok Keswani (a resident of Ambedkar Chowk, Central Avenue) under sections 51, 52 A, 63, 68A of Copyright Act. 
Police said one Sanjay Tiwari, a resident of Rathod Layout, who is representative of a reputed edible oil company, received complaints regarding rampant sale of adulterated oil under his companyâs brand name. A 15-litre oil can was being sold for Rs2,600. 
Police said the fake unit used labels and logos of genuine products to deceive consumers. âThe accused used to offer hefty commission to the shops to sell the adulterated products,â police said.
Police are carrying out further investigations. edible oil adulteration counterfeit mislabeling impure edible oil booking of three persons seizure of adulterated oil alleged Nagpur, Maharashtra, India Adulterated edible oil manufacturing unit prov:used edible oil busted an adulterated edible oil manufacturing unit using labels and logos of genuine products fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling used labels and logos of genuine products to deceive consumers using fake labels and logos fflo:hasFraudType Substitution fake unit used labels and logos of genuine products to deceive consumers adulterated edible oil fflo:foundAt Processing busted an adulterated edible oil manufacturing unit busted adulterated edible oil manufacturing unit fflo:triggeredAction booking of three persons busted an adulterated edible oil manufacturing unit and booked three persons212:T58c,Ghee adulteration racket busted in Prakasam, 3 held newindianexpress.com ONGOLE: The Prakasam police have busted a ghee adulteration racket and arrested three persons. The police seized around 10,000 kg Palmolive oil tins, around 1,000 litres of adulterated ghee stock, adulterated chilli powder stored in a godown on Friday. The accused were identified as C Ashok (30), his wife Ch Navya (29) and a worker V Suseela (30).
According to SP Siddhartha Kaushal, the Ongole-Taluk police and special branch police conducted the raids and seized large quantities of adulterated ghee and Palm oil stocks from a warehouse in Nagendra Nagar under the city limits. The SP visited the place where the adulterated ghee is manufactured. He said Ashok and others have been doing this business for the past six months. They sold adulterated ghee and oil worth Rs 72 lakh to several hotels and sweet shops. ghee adulteration palm oil arrest seizure alleged Ongole, Prakasam, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant Palmolive oil seized around 10,000 kg Palmolive oil tins, around 1,000 litres of adulterated ghee Ghee adulteration racket busted in Prakasam fflo:inRegion Prakasam Ghee adulteration racket busted in Prakasam ghee adulteration racket prov:wasAssociatedWith V Suseela The accused were identified as... and a worker V Suseela adulterated chilli powder fflo:foundAt Storage adulterated chilli powder stored in a godown213:Tb24,Patanjali mustard oil found to be of substandard food quality: Rajasthan govt indiatoday.in Patanjali mustard oil found to be of substandard food quality: Rajasthan govt
According to the Rajasthan government, mustard oil sold by Baba Ramdev's company Patanjali has been found to be substandard by the Food Safety and Standards Authority Laboratory in Alwar.
Mustard oil sold by Baba Ramdev’s company Patanjali has been found to be of substandard quality, the Rajasthan government claimed on Wednesday.
According to the state government, five samples of mustard oil supplied to Patanjali by Singhania oil mill were tested. All five samples failed. They were not of the required standard or quality.
Chief Medical Officer Dr Omprakash Meena stated that the food safety of the mustard oil pouches was tested in the presence of the local administration on May 27. The test report was produced by the Food Safety and Standards Authority Laboratory in Alwar.
ALSO READ: Plea in Bihar court seeks sedition case against Baba Ramdev
Meena said that Patanjali’s mustard oil pouch and mustard oil bottle were found to be substandard food items. Sri Sri Tattva brand’s mustard oil also got the same result.
Meanwhile, Parliament brand’s mustard oil was found to be a sub-standard and false food item.
Baba Ramdev’s Patanjali is yet to issue a statement on the issue.
Around two weeks ago, Alwar collectorate officials reportedly raided Singhania oil mill on the orders of Rajasthan Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot. Large quantities of Patanjali’s packing pouches and products were recovered and the mill was sealed.
ALSO READ: Nepal stops distribution of Coronil kits gifted by Patanjali, cites lack of proof on efficacy mustard oil substandard raid on Singhania oil mill alleged Alwar, Rajasthan, India Patanjali mustard oil substandard finding prov:wasAttributedTo Patanjali mustard oil sold by Baba Ramdev's company Patanjali has been found to be substandard Patanjali mustard oil substandard finding fflo:foundIn mustard oil mustard oil sold by Baba Ramdev's company Patanjali has been found to be substandard Patanjali mustard oil substandard finding fflo:inRegion Rajasthan According to the Rajasthan government, mustard oil sold by Baba Ramdev's company Patanjali has been found to be substandard raid on Singhania oil mill fflo:issuedBy Rajasthan Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot raided Singhania oil mill on the orders of Rajasthan Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot Patanjali mustard oil substandard finding fflo:supportedBy Food Safety and Standards Authority Laboratory in Alwar found to be substandard by the Food Safety and Standards Authority Laboratory in Alwar Patanjali mustard oil substandard finding prov:wasAttributedTo Singhania oil mill five samples of mustard oil supplied to Patanjali by Singhania oil mill were tested. All five samples failed214:T5b8,Adulteration in edible oil detected  thehindu.com Food Safety officials on Thursday ordered a edible oil packaging unit at Sangilandapuram in the city to suspend operations after they detected a case of suspected adulteration.
The officials led by R. Ramesh Babu, Designated Officer, Food Safety and Drug Administration, Tiruchi, inspected the unit on Thursday when palm oil was found packaged as refined sunflower oil. About 5,000 litres of such oil was kept for sales. Samples were collected and sent for testing, Dr. Ramesh Babu said in a press release.
About 5,410 litres of edible oil meant for sales were seized and the unit was ordered to suspend operations, he said and added that those indulging in adulteration of edible oil would face stern action.
Complaints of adulteration can be lodged by dialling 9585959595/9944959595/9444042322, he said.
Published - April 22, 2021 07:47 pm IST refined sunflower oil palm oil adulteration substitution mislabeling palm oil suspend operations seizure suspected Tiruchi, Tamil Nadu, India palm oil fflo:isSubstituteFor refined sunflower oil palm oil was found packaged as refined sunflower oil refined sunflower oil fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil palm oil was found packaged as refined sunflower oil suspected adulteration prov:wasAssociatedWith edible oil packaging unit at Sangilandapuram detected a case of suspected adulteration palm oil fflo:foundAt Processing palm oil was found packaged as refined sunflower oil215:T75d,Food safety officials conduct raids on restaurants, ghee units in Vijayawada newindianexpress.com VIJAYAWADA: Sleuths of Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) along with Vigilance officials conducted surprise raids on various restaurants and ghee manufacturing units in Vijayawada on Tuesday. It is learnt that the ghee manufacturing units are supplying low quality products to their customers, and the restaurants are also using banned chemicals to enhance the taste of the food.
According to regional food controller N Purnachandra Rao, officials from the two departments conducted raids at major restaurants in the city. During the inspection, the FSSAI officials noticed that a few restaurants are not maintaining hygienic conditions in the kitchen. They also collected samples of chicken fried rings, chicken dum biryani, mutton biryani, chicken wings and ground nut kernels from the restaurants.
The officials also raided a few general stores and seized loose groundnut oil, 65 kg of groundnut kernels, 70 kg of palmoline oil, 193 litres of cow ghee, 700 litres of buffalo ghee and 62 kg of vegan ghee, all worth `23,000. Later, addressing the media, the FSSAI officials said that preliminary inquiry found that the ghee products were adulterated using palmoline oil. They said that all the samples would be sent to the FSSAI lab for tests. ghee adulteration palmoline oil surprise raids seizure alleged Vijayawada, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palmoline oil ghee products were adulterated using palmoline oil palmoline oil fflo:isSubstituteFor ghee ghee products were adulterated using palmoline oil Food Safety and Standards Authority of India fflo:issuedBy surprise raids on various restaurants and ghee manufacturing units Sleuths of Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) along with Vigilance officials conducted surprise raids216:T8a9,Ghee, oil manufacturing units in city raided thehindu.com In a joint operation, officials of the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), along with Vigilance and Enforcement (V&E) and Revenue departments, conducted raids on various spices, ghee and oil manufacturing units in the city on Tuesday.
The teams inspected the oil mills, ghee preparing and packing industries and spices making units in Old Raja Rajeswari Peta and Ajit Singh Nagar areas. The food safety officials collected samples of the raw material and the finished products, said Assistant Food Controller N. Purnachandra Rao.
“Some traders were preparing ghee and oil with sub-standard raw material. The samples would be sent to laboratory for examination and action would be taken based on the reports”, said Vigilance officer G. Kalyan.
In Ajit Singh Nagar, Indira Naik Nagar and other areas, some food and spices manufacturing units were preparing chilli powder, turmeric and some spices with spurious material and marketing the products in the name of different brands.
Four teams conducted raids on the restaurants, oil traders, ghee and spices manufacturing units and collected samples, said MRO M. Madhuri.
The accused were allegedly supplying the spurious food products to Krishna, West Godavari, Guntur and other places.
“We seized samples of biryani, cow and buffalo ghee, some non-vegetarian dishes, edible oil and other eatables. The teams are enquiring on the source of the spurious material, the labels and where the packing material was printed and other information,” Mr. Purnachandra Rao said.
Published - April 07, 2021 07:25 am IST ghee edible oil adulteration sub-standard raw material raid inspection sample collection alleged India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant sub-standard raw material traders were preparing ghee and oil with sub-standard raw material oil fflo:hasAdulterant sub-standard raw material traders were preparing ghee and oil with sub-standard raw material chilli powder fflo:hasAdulterant spurious material preparing chilli powder, turmeric and some spices with spurious material turmeric fflo:hasAdulterant spurious material preparing chilli powder, turmeric and some spices with spurious material217:T69f,Adulteration found in paneer, mustard oil & honey in Doon | Dehradun News - Times of India indiatimes.com DEHRADUN: The district food and drug department on Monday received quality test reports of 19 food items, the samples of which were collected from the state capital in the last two months. According to the reports, adulteration was found in mustard oil, a brand of honey, pan masala, and paneer.
GC Kandwal, designated officer food safety, Dehradun, said that the sample of honey, which was found to be substandard, was collected during a special state-wide drive in October last year.
The rest of the food samples were collected in February and March 2021.
âAmong the 19 samples whose reports arrived on Monday, seven were found to be substandard. The adulterated products include a renowned brand of honey and four pan masalas,â said Kandwal.
The food and drug department will now be sending notices to seek explanations from the manufacturers of the products which were found substandard.
The official added that five samples of edible oil, 23 samples of milk and related products, six products of sweet, three cereal-based products, chips, spices and beverages were collected for quality testing. mustard oil adulteration unclear Dehradun, Uttarakhand, India mustard oil fflo:hasAdulterant unspecified adulterant in mustard oil adulteration was found in mustard oil Adulteration in mustard oil fflo:foundAtStep Retail samples of which were collected from the state capital Adulteration in paneer fflo:foundAtStep Retail samples of which were collected from the state capital Adulteration in mustard oil fflo:inRegion Dehradun Adulteration found in paneer, mustard oil & honey in Doon218:T7b3,Mumbai: Over 50% edible oils seized in raids found non-certified freepressjournal.in More than 50 per cent of edible oils seized by the Food and Drug Administration in Thane and Mumbai during raids last month have been found to be non-certified, the FDA has said.
Raids were conducted on eight establishments of retail and wholesale merchants in Thane and neighbouring Mumbai on January 16, the FDA said in a release issued on Monday.
Edible oils, including mustard, peanut, sunflower and palm oil, worth Rs 4.98 crore were seized, it said.
Later, 93 samples were sent for testing, out of which 49 (or 52.6 per cent) were found to be non-certified, the release said.
The remaining stock which was certified by authorities concerned would be released for sale, while action would be taken against those selling non-certified oils, it said.
The FDA joint commissioners have been ordered to inspect the quality of various edible oils being stored and sold at outlets across the state, it added. mustard oil peanut oil sunflower oil palm oil substandard mislabeling seizure inspection pending_test Mumbai, Thane, Maharashtra, India mustard oil fflo:belongsToCategory Oils Edible oils, including mustard, peanut, sunflower and palm oil peanut oil fflo:belongsToCategory Oils Edible oils, including mustard, peanut, sunflower and palm oil sunflower oil fflo:belongsToCategory Oils Edible oils, including mustard, peanut, sunflower and palm oil palm oil fflo:belongsToCategory Oils Edible oils, including mustard, peanut, sunflower and palm oil Raids on edible oil establishments fflo:issuedBy Food and Drug Administration seized by the Food and Drug Administration in Thane and Mumbai during raids Non-certified edible oils finding fflo:foundAtStep Retail Raids were conducted on eight establishments of retail and wholesale merchants Non-certified edible oils finding fflo:foundAtStep Distribution Raids were conducted on eight establishments of retail and wholesale merchants219:T688,Another fake ghee and honey making unit busted in Cuttack newindianexpress.com CUTTACK: Continuing its crackdown on the manufacture and sale of adulterated food items in the city, Commissionerate Police on Saturday busted another fake ghee and honey making unit in CDA Sector-9.
Police also seized 248 litre of adulterated ghee under the brand name Binayak Puja Vanaspati and 330 litre of rice bran and refined oil.
Acting on a tip-off, Markat Nagar police carried out a raid on the illegal manufacturing unit and sealed it after the owner failed to produce trade licence supporting to making and marketing of the products, said Markat Nagar IIC Pradipta Naik.
Owner of the unit Deepak Agrawal and driver of a trolley auto-rickshaw have been detained for interrogation.
Agrawal, who was earlier running the unit in Dhenkanal, had shifted his factory to Cuttack six months back for better marketing opportunities.
“Samples of the ghee have been collected by the food safety officials and sent to laboratory for examination,” Naik said.
Meanwhile, police also arrested Subas Mallick, owner of Subas Ghee who was at large after the cops unearthed fake products from Subash Nutrition Pvt Ltd in Jagatpur on November 30. ghee adulteration unsafe_food adulterated ghee raid seizure detention alleged Cuttack, Odisha, India laboratory examination fso:isPerformedOn Samples of the ghee Samples of the ghee have been collected by the food safety officials and sent to laboratory for examination fake ghee and honey making unit in CDA Sector-9 prov:used ghee fake ghee and honey making unit adulterated ghee fflo:foundAt Processing busted another fake ghee and honey making unit21a:Tbdb,KHANDWA: Over 1,300 kilograms of ingredients used in making spurious ghee seized, factory sealed in Chhirkhel village, 4 arrested freepressjournal.in Khandwa: Four persons have been arrested in connection with making spurious ghee at a factory in Chhirkhel village. It was joint raid of Chhegaon Makhan and Padamnagar police conducted under anti-adulteration campaign being run in the district on Thursday.
Acting on a tip off, joint team of two police stations was constituted by City Superintendent of Police Lalit Gathre, which sealed the factory and arrested four accused involved in manufacturing and selling of spurious ghee.
More than 1,300 kilograms of ingredients used in the preparation of fake ghee was seized. Dalda ghee, oil, mixture of butter and curd and inedible stuff such as Colgate, Dabur toothpaste, Lal Dant Manjan among other goods were used to make ghee spuriously. Chief accused Amit Dulhani used to sell this fake ghee through the village women in villages, towns, colonies and markets.
Sources said another godown of Dulhani is located in Kallan Ganj in Khandwa where inedible materials are stocked. The accused sold 50 kilograms of ghee everyday. The food department has collected samples from the spot for tests. The accused has been running the factory without any licence.
Those arrested accused are Amit Dulhani, son of Sitaram Sindhi, 42, resident of Padamnagar Sindhi Colony, Radha Bai wife of Radheshyam, 45, resident of Chhirkhel village, Rukma Bai, wife of Narsingh, 60, resident of Mohanpura village and Rekla Bai wife of Gyan Singh Gilala, 50. A case has been registered under Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. The police team will be rewarded by Khandwa Superintendent of Police for this success. ghee adulteration Colgate Dabur toothpaste Lal Dant Manjan arrest seizure factory sealed case registered alleged Khandwa, Madhya Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant Colgate Colgate, Dabur toothpaste, Lal Dant Manjan among other goods were used to make ghee spuriously Spurious Ghee Manufacturing Act prov:wasAssociatedWith Amit Dulhani Chief accused Amit Dulhani used to sell this fake ghee Spurious Ghee Manufacturing Act prov:used oil Dalda ghee, oil, mixture of butter and curd and inedible stuff such as Colgate, Dabur toothpaste, Lal Dant Manjan among other goods were used to make ghee spuriously Spurious Ghee Manufacturing Act prov:used butter mixture of butter and curd and inedible stuff Spurious Ghee Manufacturing Act prov:used curd mixture of butter and curd and inedible stuff Spurious Ghee Adulteration Incident prov:wasAttributedTo Amit Dulhani Those arrested accused are Amit Dulhani Spurious Ghee Adulteration Incident prov:wasAttributedTo Radha Bai Those arrested accused are Amit Dulhani... Radha Bai wife of Radheshyam Spurious Ghee Adulteration Incident prov:wasAttributedTo Rukma Bai Those arrested accused are Amit Dulhani... Rukma Bai Spurious Ghee Adulteration Incident prov:wasAttributedTo Rekla Bai Those arrested accused are ... Rekla Bai wife of Gyan Singh Gilala21b:T77c,Duplicate ghee making unit busted | Surat News - Times of India indiatimes.com Surat: Police busted a duplicate ghee manufacturing and distribution racket in Sarthana area on Monday and seized ghee and vehicles worth Rs 19 lakh. 
Five persons were also arrested for running the racket. They were identified as Haresh Bodra, Alpesh Asodariya, Nrupesh Savaliya, Nilesh Savaliya, and Paresh Savaliya. 
Puna police station sources said one Ravi Patoliya, who used to supply raw material for manufacturing the ghee, is on the run.
Bodra and Asodariya were carrying around 300 pouches of Sumul ghee in a mini van when police stopped them for checking in Punagam area. They could not produce bills or any other document for the product after which they were questioned in detail. Police seized the ghee and sent some samples for testing in a laboratory. âAfter tests found that the ghee was duplicate, police raided the manufacturing facility with a team of Surat Municipal Corporation (SMC),â said an official.
Police nabbed Nrupesh, Nilesh and Paresh from the facility in Vraj Chowk at Sarthana. 
Earlier on January 5, police had raided two places in Rander and seized duplicate ghee and edible oil of top brands from warehouses. Investigation revealed that the products being distributed from these warehouses were manufactured in Sarthana. ghee adulteration counterfeit duplicate ghee arrest seizure raid alleged Surat, Gujarat, India ghee manufacturing racket prov:used ghee busted a duplicate ghee manufacturing and distribution racket ghee manufacturing racket prov:wasAssociatedWith Haresh Bodra Five persons were also arrested for running the racket. They were identified as Haresh Bodra ghee manufacturing racket prov:wasAssociatedWith Ravi Patoliya Ravi Patoliya, who used to supply raw material for manufacturing the ghee, is on the run duplicate ghee fflo:foundAt Processing raided the manufacturing facility21c:T7a0,Madhya Pradesh: Oil factory owner in Indore arrested for packing palm oil in branded soyabean oil packets freepressjournal.in Indore: An oil factory owner was arrested for packing palm oil in the packets of different brands of soyabean and other vegetable oils in Palda area late on Friday. The joint team of food department and administration raided the factory and the sample of the oil was taken from there.
Bhanwarkuan police station incharge Santosh Kumar Dudhi said the raid was conducted at the factory named Bhole Food Product on Palda Road. The food department found that the factory owner Yogesh Kukreja, 40, a resident of Kesarbag Road was packing the imported palm oil in brand packets of soyabean and vegetable oils. He was also using a hallmark on the packets to gain consumers’ trust.
The officials found that the quality of palm oil was also not good. The team detained Kukreja and handed him over to police. The police have registered a case under Sections 420, 272, 273 of the IPC against the accused on the complaint of food inspector Himani Singh. soyabean oil palm oil substitution mislabeling substandard palm oil arrest case_registered alleged Indore, Madhya Pradesh, India Packing palm oil in soyabean oil packets prov:used soyabean oil packing the imported palm oil in brand packets of soyabean palm oil fflo:isSubstituteFor soyabean oil packing the imported palm oil in brand packets of soyabean Packing palm oil in soyabean oil packets fflo:hasFraudType Substitution packing palm oil in the packets of different brands of soyabean Packing palm oil in soyabean oil packets fflo:hasFraudType Mislabeling packing palm oil in the packets of different brands of soyabean and other vegetable oils Palm oil fflo:foundAt Bhole Food Product factory named Bhole Food Product on Palda Road Packing palm oil in soyabean oil packets prov:wasAssociatedWith Yogesh Kukreja factory owner Yogesh Kukreja... was packing the imported palm oil21d:T23e9,Poison on the plate: Markets see rise in fake food products newindianexpress.com BHUBANESWAR: You eat with your eyes first, goes an adage. But going just by the looks of it may prove fatal considering the extent of spurious food that have made their way into the open markets, particularly from Cuttack. The recent raids by the Commissionerate Police are a pointer to the volume of fake and sub-standard food items laced with chemicals flooding the markets.
What are you consuming?
From ghee, honey, turmeric and chilli powders to tomato sauce and soya chunks, the food adulteration network runs deep. The products are prepared using harmful chemicals, colours and sold to unsuspecting consumers at cheaper rates. A report suggests that spurious ghee is a heady mix of palm oil, vanaspati and yellow chemical colour; honey is prepared using water, sugar and chemical colour. For turmeric powder, the adulterators use waste rice powder and non-edible synthetic yellow colour.
The list does not end here. Soya chunks are prepared using flour and ammonium bicarbonate (a levelling agent) that makes the dough light and airy besides, chilli powder is laced with non-edible aniline dyes. The innocuous ketchups that go into your noodles, rolls and fast food are prepared using cheap red, orange and green colours along with a mixture of pumpkin, potato and tomato paste. These sauces are easily available in the market and commonly used by street food vendors.
Capital Hospital’s Department of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology (FMT) consultant Dr LK Behera says adulterated food can cause serious health hazards and lead to diseases like cancer. “Turmeric is often adulterated by mixing wood powder and can cause obstruction in the intestine while chemicals in food products can cause cancer, gastroenteritis, liver and skin diseases, and others,” he says.
Profits First, Health Second
The trade of spurious food is booming and food adulterators make a profit of 200 per cent (pc) through the illegal trade as cost of production is cheap.For example, production cost of a kg of refined honey is Rs 200 but that of adulterated honey is only Rs 40 which though sells for Rs 140 per kg in the market, says a report by Commissionerate Police. Whereas pure honey costs Rs 300 a kg and has a profit margin of 15 pc, sale of spurious honey brings 100 pc profit.
Similarly, production of branded and popular tomato or chilli sauce would cost Rs 120 per kg but the spurious and low-quality costs only Rs 30. The genuine sauce costs Rs 160 per kg having a profit margin of 20 pc but the fake one is sold at Rs 70 per kg with an 80 pc profit margin.The production cost of pure turmeric and chilli powders is Rs 150 per kg and adulterated is Rs 70 per kg. Unadulterated turmeric and chilli powders are available for Rs 260 per kg with a profit margin of 20 pc and the spurious powders are sold for Rs 120 per kg having a profit margin of about 60 pc.
Similarly, adulteration of clarified butter or ghee is equally profitable with the unscrupulous elements earning 40 pc profit from the business. Production of ghee costs Rs 300 per kg and a kg of the spurious stock can be prepared with just Rs 80. Pure ghee is available in the market between Rs 350 and Rs 500, the spurious counterpart is available at Rs 150 a kg.
When it comes to soybeans, production cost is Rs 60 per kg as compared to Rs 30 per kg for the unadulterated item. Soybeans are sold for Rs 80 per kg in the market with 15 pc profit margin as compared to Rs 50 for the adulterated product having 40 pc profit margin. “It’s the high profit margin which drives these spurious food manufactures to sustain,” says Cuttack DCP Prateek Singh who has gone after the adulterators in his area of operation.
The Market & Consumers
The recent raids show food adulteration mafia operates mostly out of Cuttack city and Jagatpur which are hubs of manufacturing consumer goods besides outskirts of the Millennium City where they can remain low-profile. The businesses have been flourishing as surveillance by Cuttack district administration as well as the municipal corporation is next to nothing.
The consumer base, though, is spread across the region and food class. Much of the low-standard food is consumed by caterers which use the cost advantage to save on spending. Fast food makers are a big consumer base too as they pay little attention to health and hygiene; nor do their buyers.
“These manufacturers also focus on suburban and rural landscape of neighbouring districts where quality of packaged food is never under scrutiny due to poor surveillance of Food Supplies and Consumer Welfare Department,” says an officer.
Last year, Commissionerate Police alone registered 21 cases against production of adulterated food items and arrested 25 persons arrested while seizing goods worth over Rs 7.36 crore. This means the overall business of such spurious food manufacturers run into tens of crores rupees across the State, just going by the volume exposed by Twin City Police.
Intensifying Surveillance
The raids have led to alarm but also brought relief from people in general that adulterated food is being obliterated from the markets. Locals have urged police to continue raids at food manufacturing units to arrest the menace. Surveillance is the need of the hour, they said. Apparently, such illegal units continue to thrive due to complacence of the municipal corporations and district administrations. Consider this: Odisha scored only 53.15 pc in Food Safety and Standards Authority of India’s second State Food Safety Index in 2019-20.
This index is based on performance of the State on five significant parameters - human resources and institutional data, compliance, food testing (infrastructure and surveillance), training and capacity building, and consumer empowerment. The Index is a dynamic quantitative and qualitative benchmarking model that provides an objective framework for evaluating food safety across all States/UTs. FSSAI states that states scoring below 60 pc score need a push.
Keep an Eye on Prices
Cuttack-Bhubaneswar Police Commissioner Sudhanshu Sarangi has urged citizens to not compromise with price while buying food items as adulterated products cost less in open markets. People must inform police if they find the price of a food product to be surprisingly low.
“Our raids will continue so that health is not a casualty. We have also requested Odisha Industrial Infrastructure Development Corporation to review the land allotment of the units found to be involved in manufacturing adulterated food items and take necessary action against them,” said Sarangi.
Food adulteration is conducted to alter the taste and quantity and can have serious impacts on an individual’s health. People must be alert,” Dr Behera cautions. ghee adulteration palm oil vanaspati yellow chemical colour raids alleged Cuttack, Odisha, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant palm oil spurious ghee is a heady mix of palm oil ghee fflo:hasAdulterant vanaspati spurious ghee is a heady mix of palm oil, vanaspati ghee fflo:hasAdulterant yellow chemical colour spurious ghee is a heady mix of palm oil, vanaspati and yellow chemical colour honey fflo:hasAdulterant water honey is prepared using water, sugar and chemical colour honey fflo:hasAdulterant sugar honey is prepared using water, sugar and chemical colour honey fflo:hasAdulterant chemical colour honey is prepared using water, sugar and chemical colour turmeric powder fflo:hasAdulterant waste rice powder For turmeric powder, the adulterators use waste rice powder turmeric powder fflo:hasAdulterant non-edible synthetic yellow colour For turmeric powder, the adulterators use waste rice powder and non-edible synthetic yellow colour soya chunks fflo:hasAdulterant ammonium bicarbonate Soya chunks are prepared using flour and ammonium bicarbonate chilli powder fflo:hasAdulterant aniline dyes chilli powder is laced with non-edible aniline dyes turmeric powder fflo:hasAdulterant wood powder Turmeric is often adulterated by mixing wood powder wood powder fflo:causesEffect obstruction in the intestine mixing wood powder and can cause obstruction in the intestine chemicals in food products fflo:causesEffect cancer chemicals in food products can cause cancer chemicals in food products fflo:causesEffect gastroenteritis chemicals in food products can cause cancer, gastroenteritis chemicals in food products fflo:causesEffect liver diseases chemicals in food products can cause cancer, gastroenteritis, liver and skin diseases chemicals in food products fflo:causesEffect skin diseases chemicals in food products can cause cancer, gastroenteritis, liver and skin diseases 21 cases against production of adulterated food items fflo:issuedBy Commissionerate Police Commissionerate Police alone registered 21 cases against production of adulterated food items arrest of 25 persons fflo:issuedBy Commissionerate Police Commissionerate Police alone registered 21 cases and arrested 25 persons State Food Safety Index fflo:hasDefinition dynamic quantitative and qualitative benchmarking model The Index is a dynamic quantitative and qualitative benchmarking model21e:Tad0,Duplicate ghee making unit busted in Rander | Surat News - Times of India indiatimes.com Surat: The prevention of crime branch (PCB) sleuths busted a duplicate ghee and oil making racket in Rander and seized over 358 kg products. Police arrested three persons from the raided warehouse while two others involved in manufacturing are yet to get caught. 
They were making duplicate ghee and oil using sunflower oil, vegetable ghee, ghee flavour and yellow colour.
The ghee and oil were sold using names of top brands and packed in original looking packets of Sumul, Amul, Sagar ghee and Fortune oil. 
The raid at a warehouse in Mashal Chawk of Palanpur Patiya was carried out following specific information and complaints received from Fortune Oil officials. 
On being nabbed from the spot, the two persons - Janak Bhajiwala and Sanjeev Nadkarni - told police that they supplied the duplicate products to Diva Traders owned by one Jayendra Lakhani. Police raided Lakhaniâs warehouse nearby and seized the products. Lakhani too was nabbed.
Two other accused, Shankar Marwadi and Mangal Marwadi, who are suspected to be involved in manufacturing the duplicate product, are yet to get arrested.
The accused were booked under various sections of IPC and Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, The Trade Marks Act and The Copyright Act, said Sanjay Bhatia, police inspector, PCB. 
âThey mixed sunflower oil, colour, ghee flavour and vegetable ghee and put it to boil. After a while, it turned liquid that looked and tasted exactly like ghee,â said Bhati. ghee sunflower oil vegetable ghee adulteration counterfeit sunflower oil vegetable ghee ghee flavour yellow colour raid arrest seizure alleged Surat, Gujarat, India Duplicate ghee and oil making racket prov:used ghee making duplicate ghee and oil using sunflower oil, vegetable ghee Duplicate ghee and oil making racket prov:used sunflower oil making duplicate ghee and oil using sunflower oil, vegetable ghee Duplicate ghee and oil making racket prov:used vegetable ghee making duplicate ghee and oil using sunflower oil, vegetable ghee Duplicate ghee and oil making racket prov:wasAssociatedWith Janak Bhajiwala two persons - Janak Bhajiwala and Sanjeev Nadkarni - told police that they supplied Duplicate ghee and oil making racket prov:wasAssociatedWith Sanjeev Nadkarni two persons - Janak Bhajiwala and Sanjeev Nadkarni - told police that they supplied Duplicate ghee and oil making racket prov:wasAssociatedWith Shankar Marwadi Two other accused, Shankar Marwadi and Mangal Marwadi, who are suspected to be involved in manufacturing Duplicate ghee and oil making racket prov:wasAssociatedWith Mangal Marwadi Two other accused, Shankar Marwadi and Mangal Marwadi, who are suspected to be involved in manufacturing21f:Ta7d,15000 litres of adulterated cooking oil seized by FSSAI timesofindia.indiatimes.com Adulteration of food is a major concern in most third world countries, and India is no stranger to it. A lot of food products are mixed with foreign agents for a variety of reasons. Milk is often mixed with water, milk powder, and even detergent so that more milk can be saved to sell another batch. Vegetables and fruits are adulterated with dye to make the stale variety appear fresh. Adulterated food can be life threatening and can lead to multiple health issues that can be life threatening.
A new entrant to the adulterated food list is edible oil. The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) seized around 1500 litres of unlabelled cooking oil, on suspicion of it being adulterated. The oil tins were stocked in a warehouse near a town called Anur, Coimbatore, and were immediately seized. The warehouse belonged to a resident from Kariyagoundanur village, near Annur.
The surprise raid was conducted on Monday, 27th August, and it was found that the business was being run by a father-son duo, who were adding refined palm olein, a high fat liquid component of palm oil, to groundnut oil, coconut oil, and sunflower oil. Dr. K. Tamilselvan, Designated Officer of FSSAI in Coimbatore, said, “We have lifted samples of the oils, which will be tested in a Government food laboratory. Further action will be taken based on the test results.”
The duo was mixing super olein, which costs ₹70 per litre, and selling the adulterated groundnut oil for a price ranging from ₹240 to ₹280 per litre. They were selling the oil to many areas within Coimbatore such as Annur, Mettupalayam, Sirumugai and Periyanaickenpalayam, without having obtained a license from FSSAI to carry out the business. This had been going on for four years, and all the oil tins were unlabelled. The warehouse was sealed after the raid. groundnut oil coconut oil sunflower oil refined palm olein adulteration substitution dilution refined palm olein seizure warehouse sealed suspected Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India adulteration of groundnut oil, coconut oil, and sunflower oil prov:wasAssociatedWith father-son duo business was being run by a father-son duo, who were adding refined palm olein refined palm olein fflo:foundAt warehouse near Anur, Coimbatore oil tins were stocked in a warehouse near a town called Anur, Coimbatore adulteration of groundnut oil prov:wasAssociatedWith The duo The duo was mixing super olein, which costs ₹70 per litre, and selling the adulterated groundnut oil adulteration of groundnut oil fflo:inRegion Annur selling the oil to many areas within Coimbatore such as Annur0:{"rsc":["$","$1","c",{"children":[[["$","section",null,{"className":"border-b border-[var(--line)] bg-[var(--white)]","children":["$","div",null,{"className":"section-shell grid gap-10 py-14 md:grid-cols-[minmax(0,1fr)_minmax(16rem,.42fr)] md:py-20","children":[["$","div",null,{"children":[["$","p",null,{"className":"eyebrow rule-label","children":"Food & issue taxonomy"}],["$","h1",null,{"className":"font-editorial mt-6 max-w-4xl text-4xl leading-[1.08] text-[var(--maroon-dark)] sm:text-5xl lg:text-6xl","children":"Browse a normalized hierarchy of Oil and Ghee evidence"}],["$","p",null,{"className":"mt-6 max-w-3xl text-lg leading-8 text-[var(--muted)]","children":"Broad categories organize normalized concepts while preserving original model terms as aliases. The hierarchy covers food products, issue types, adulterants, claim status, regulatory actions, supply-chain stages, detection methods and ontology relationships."}]]}],["$","div",null,{"className":"self-end border-l-2 border-[var(--saffron)] pl-5 text-sm leading-6 text-[var(--muted)]","children":["$","p",null,{"children":"Counts describe this model extraction release. They are not official prevalence estimates and do not imply that every unresolved triplet is a validated ontology mapping."}]}]]}]}],["$","div",null,{"className":"section-shell py-12","children":["$","$L2",null,{"taxonomy":{"status":"extraction_derived","scope":"Published Oil and Ghee event records","taxonomy_version":"hierarchical_v1","classification_policy":"Deterministic parent categories and normalized concepts; original model terms are retained as aliases.","facets":[{"id":"food_products","label":"Food products","description":"Products and ingredients represented in published event objects.","groups":[{"id":"food_products:group:ghee","name":"Ghee","definition":"The parent food category for ghee products in this release.","occurrences":478,"article_count":418,"event_count":466,"article_ids":["008cc0e4-d7d7-475f-80d8-d81621e7b862","0109eea0-3adc-4177-a6f7-e3bc31bf237d","030df41e-ccfc-4023-a026-89cc92bf3253","03ea9124-befd-4983-bcdc-147e3ed3bf73","04c00967-a247-4802-b3c2-3f266885c385","05375704-5b45-4e0a-b388-9944c0c5fc9f","05937ca4-de64-422f-ba56-878f6152027c","0932679a-fe82-4a1e-949e-9d4fd17ed2a0","0a113e2a-26d3-45e4-9064-7cfa2f39230b","0a23e582-3dac-4091-bf36-a08d511a3763","0a342064-5378-4aff-b4aa-34ae5c1ab66b","0aa842b8-1ac9-4243-a8b6-5d98d32d6089","0af3703f-23ec-4f8f-a1b6-45b4adb68b12","0b5a50e0-df3b-42ea-83c6-80bc16cf39fb","0d14295d-a954-4163-8974-ecb51bd464e8","0d96e6b1-57f6-4555-8711-703a6c818eea","0e464dfa-d504-4806-9005-c1ba38758bf8","0e518ac8-dc53-4c79-938a-bd26c1142eeb","0ea7c6a7-d2c1-498f-aa00-f3fc942206ed","0ef4d3e4-844c-47ee-a430-8f171ec4c000","0f7493be-b335-4851-9029-9e87ba0da155","0facca96-d90c-4f21-ba98-356f7f6b1622","102a4953-33a2-4842-827e-987e3bb6ce7a","10f36230-190b-4b13-8cfc-8d12c2f37080","141518ef-ce68-4969-bb2a-66f56733fab2","15f9d255-f348-4fb7-ba3d-003ab6adcfb2","164f43df-a069-4197-9854-e7bd9fc78fae","178d6244-50cd-4bea-8e16-f951f6227a8c","18f4411e-1d84-42c5-835a-97436ad30c7c","1931e9b4-edf1-42ec-a9c4-00ff0cbcff9a","1933f8f5-8812-4e24-85bd-cdbdc83f929e","194f3e22-f4b6-483b-9333-762c3a3b6b9d","1a066d87-0093-4ca8-9c10-84c004b76c48","1a806023-ac1d-4da2-924e-25821c2554f5","1a87f314-ec7e-4407-96f2-0995e8d26fc0","1addfba0-b7e9-4722-85be-a642cdf63571","1ae756d4-675e-4a08-bc7d-ba6a3e922d5d","1b1069d2-3f50-4dd3-a8bd-0aeed6bacf98","1b74e29d-f583-4ee4-96bc-e93553c915b3","1bb0d3e5-6f04-4d91-a899-8b6f59bc228a","1c7ea343-020a-4266-9854-b12ebfa2cf50","1c8fe57c-2cee-4f73-a5f3-6ee4051024e7","1de4a13b-1497-421e-b5bc-a8ebbc7a3b18","1de65c17-36dd-4ba6-ada6-bcd98b556aad","1df33743-1016-49ce-981b-862125c0893f","1e6b9f5b-a065-4242-ae58-1f105455955f","1fe9639d-5c39-472e-94a7-73ac2b03bfce","2010c6e2-c9cb-4a3e-b22b-8cabf1044074","2013c452-d1c8-41a0-abea-92e26d231790","21fb2b00-9b86-4924-9a0d-248f976cfd93","22261df7-8974-447f-a1cf-192c59528f64","2255e304-d6ef-4707-b594-cbc3955019ec","229a7f40-f956-476e-8c84-3fd9ed3d6c29","22bf4101-c33b-4711-b6e3-379968f7c217","23a5dd2a-a53c-44b8-8b86-37e04d4cf1ee","23ff1efe-782a-4174-8f33-41a3ff0e8c44","2499d49c-748f-41d8-84d9-eed7a66ad43a","255ac21d-c17e-4926-9dad-13db7698ed72","2679a7a3-abde-4979-ac6e-5cf24113e0db","268e5866-7aea-4546-934f-f105a70b1096","26ac5726-fd69-42b8-a80e-6a71b91ba466","26b11917-4e55-41d5-aeb1-64e8b44bedba","2719a94d-d523-4fef-bfd9-a1bef16dd951","28a03096-e60c-4adb-b4fa-55f0bd28a95d","292b562c-132b-47cc-9030-d2544e801e7e","29a173b3-4587-4257-9c93-2f0c483079c5","2a59f77c-89ba-49fe-be6c-b3c9756a9940","2ad1f047-985c-4c59-aa13-749fa75bcba9","2b442757-da6a-46e5-ae37-b083e00062d3","2c075e82-3fe3-4b95-a68a-f0fad41e51f5","2d8a95d1-8554-4194-b427-4239c3f9ad5b","2f23ec7d-e712-46f5-ae1c-5e7634725242","2fc5c9f1-64d2-498f-8f7a-96d94b926f6d","2fe1bef6-e797-4d9f-bb5b-6f936d7a55dc","2fede3c0-46a7-46e8-a776-5a6fd6d3f08e","301bb818-ff44-4346-9ffe-ad58bf13cfb2","31cae76c-aa62-4328-bd40-368275f60e9f","31f1f824-c698-4b97-a52a-1a1136a9ac6e","3278338f-1fa0-4045-9701-e237d5ad0930","3282adec-c328-4317-a091-a126587d78de","32bc8e29-1313-4d9b-86ff-8c3bb665f057","33326887-4ed0-4562-a0ac-b889d6ad53a9","336a89c4-d98a-4242-8803-4d479689bc4d","3401730f-3850-4c7d-884f-dcdb1d086c42","34b8b88f-e283-46cd-ba6e-f373dc3d4395","34dc1c1f-d12c-4230-bb1c-e41b6961f288","3624ed70-d464-4caa-9b4e-4dfc2ed435dc","368930a7-2085-43bd-bb79-62d471c9e75c","36a70fc6-de5a-494c-9dc5-801fe7a7a53d","3797cfc4-05a5-422b-b823-ed3bb850f540","3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","3865528e-cbb8-4615-af7d-f9ab01e9fe4d","38d24327-d93d-472b-99ac-246351c7dbfd","3911de79-cbfd-4eaa-9311-207b452faa93","394a5ff5-76f3-4885-87ed-4a6879611c22","39a9fb26-817d-404e-a150-4e4c5ebc037c","39e61860-2a60-448c-838e-a7f01e4d0c5c","3c0e9d23-f858-47eb-8e7a-23db1d42822a","3cdd0ffb-841b-4883-9b1a-df7b28022554","3d6b98eb-c79e-460c-883b-9c997ffea009","3e2829b3-2380-49cb-a370-77a313e8eaa1","3e325b99-7611-4f89-8963-7f79c5ac4105","3f674523-5416-4b89-8cab-fe3ddf3c9e7e","411b1d1a-7b18-4425-90f0-da2c296625eb","4216dab3-b436-422a-a6ee-74b5858f7aa2","4260e03f-c3cd-480c-827c-7ebe3a09e913","4299b01d-c5ab-4283-ae2d-31aa1fdbbfec","432f2c6e-3092-44cd-bf1b-54249b31ad6b","438c4f31-19bd-4ff3-bed4-035569ec6cbf","43de8661-2844-46b7-bb39-15eb17f6b82e","43e20f96-27cb-4f67-b7e5-6228aea8e7b6","445ff19b-5429-4a55-be3f-c4b03481b04f","4469e268-1b01-49b7-a436-ea4a88ba6269","451d9824-7933-403d-beaa-1ac6398509c9","45fdd40d-5bc4-4fe7-9eb9-883c55f14a70","46441742-607f-484f-80fe-b1334048144a","4661fe17-e88d-41ab-a8c6-9aefcbbaed5c","471bc3da-bbd4-417c-875a-595a713be7fd","4726ed7e-d61a-4a2c-9e05-59cbaa4f1bf0","473ed916-1979-4222-b1e8-38d39c51fe03","47635cd8-696c-4adf-94ed-338f084a3d62","484a6113-0a95-4624-8291-c00710260e4d","4974f73f-37bc-4300-8d31-d97ca337365b","4a021f95-539e-4217-98a0-d651be9a3b47","4a638904-2bcf-4037-8afd-ec6e5b0b6b11","4c67d899-fab5-4e78-9274-526d6a4fe0bb","4cd73621-691c-4866-91c1-0b99d0d1a89a","4d6ab7d0-4e16-4d1b-aa49-7f453c9352b6","4d7063c6-5201-4ce1-89ed-75ee21d51b98","4eb18b90-e310-48db-9531-68b146420749","4f3026f8-7217-4bf9-af6e-71bcad8bb1c5","4fa075c9-a30f-47e5-8f09-158017bfd6d6","502ff9a1-ac00-4ef2-96cb-0a0614085766","504dd102-6089-4fcb-a066-0006720862a7","508d009a-650f-4e40-b03d-ebef9d2c069e","5118358f-2777-4bfd-a761-adb4bc1da763","51a534c1-9193-4b8c-bbd2-b4e368930ead","5245dc0a-5d68-4a00-ad89-6255f3bee930","526515f5-4a82-4b0b-9e1c-7f3a2aa4cde4","52bd3a8a-1c92-484d-8be6-5f7e4a7274e1","534ab39c-32c3-46ea-a742-5095170a0003","5374dadc-cd7f-41df-b8d9-8ef7c10ec693","53f8ec9a-900f-481f-bfb5-a6ca452416ed","5406e730-2d78-47b4-ba27-fc933e691eab","54637d34-f16e-4e98-84c1-681a0fca559c","54686005-b842-4cc5-82b1-0276e36a42b6","550bda80-b5be-488a-89f6-64b9698b4033","554708da-6872-4a1b-91cc-3beeb59fbf2e","55552c00-e696-4ac2-951e-156364cb1337","5710a503-9fbe-46ae-abd5-2663069b70db","57b2326c-e877-4995-82fc-221eda139718","5804b97c-c416-49d1-9fbd-5bb52c0595dd","58163259-bc87-4025-a6cc-f3a0848b52cf","58679f65-396b-4b1f-b725-9907ebc9f038","58ac029e-4204-42c4-8ff3-6dbd84dd382a","58c8e8bf-9cbd-46dd-8a8b-b1b5cbb0d58d","590fff58-7ba9-4a5b-8232-4c27d67f13b1","5a7bde0b-59e0-4f86-9b63-2bbebb593d41","5c86116b-5fae-45a9-b467-01fc8b26a166","5d222c9b-8733-4d3b-abaa-59f77da35546","5f6c5fd0-a2f8-4bfe-9ac4-a8d06bc8640a","5fa4530c-d60b-48c1-b6b2-371abff6d77a","60ccacb1-7c41-4259-b651-bfbf60e7b53a","6135126e-45b3-4fe7-a80f-82248b08ea7b","61a00782-20f7-4170-b4e2-d9d9157b3a3c","620bfde0-ec72-4b52-bfa4-e06ce3b56960","62bc0e3c-1d90-4688-bc1b-e00f620c5c8c","634a0a0f-0899-427f-9396-6cc3c5442643","6411a3a1-2932-41eb-b497-f9a2400de74c","64902247-dbff-448d-987f-c89ac2e30538","66bb816a-1961-4e45-8460-9328304c7956","6721b632-2b4f-492a-840d-bb05d2a9f1af","672ecfdb-cb9d-485d-8fc1-76e6a8269fe7","67c4a0dd-5f32-4dde-b733-4a4a9e5dfafb","68753b50-8fe7-4499-bb2d-ddfcc7e16c94","6901ef7b-f98a-4b3a-b622-85196fe10ffb","696bb9a6-aa69-4de4-a566-5df21482bc51","6a44ea24-a3bf-4ad8-96b1-5ae56cefb84c","6ab671c9-310c-4d88-bd88-0251180b2345","6cf864fb-5956-4416-a1c5-f42153e66ec4","6ee56cf3-78f2-4420-bede-08f76397b2fb","6f00035b-1437-428d-895c-a234866e29e0","6f4adcf4-c63b-41c9-b7f6-0b0f4e75c857","706246bb-b5c8-4d73-81fa-2e93d040c762","706f0136-7ae5-45f2-b804-e3a8c9a14d1c","70b9c7ef-3983-40dd-b904-5607537ff37f","71196507-ad87-406f-a4df-edc8a14b1575","73066633-67a8-4240-8c5a-3c4ae29b486d","73369c4a-c44b-4b7a-b3cc-07766ccb4e2a","73e97a89-5b5f-4104-bc6a-50b8f564040a","747400a0-bfad-4fa2-8004-06f237d1c543","75eac450-5d76-45da-975a-a47f1515ca01","75f7eb04-35fe-48ce-af4a-d0ccf3067076","77ed2567-2595-48f0-891b-a753164f2866","7855cb39-b177-4d3b-bd72-0a18afd5415b","79cfeedd-0cef-4026-962d-c86d241c4e56","79f059b8-00b2-4345-ad46-440c7bc371df","7a539249-77a2-4e2b-a29f-6952304d80d7","7a59b547-cf09-4b46-bbfe-d7a7f34b7cfc","7a707681-5edc-461c-b5a8-0057a374f3cc","7b3b345d-0902-4461-a6bc-747c26feb7f2","7c914cb3-8ba1-4768-ac56-a051b75a6e8b","7ddc7283-670a-4dfb-9e38-a11aa0c579c2","8151434e-f600-47a9-93df-16b483e88961","815dcb75-691c-4066-a898-b7ed46fdbdf2","816a43e1-6b33-4a27-a385-9d12dd8e924f","8187d86e-f46c-4e26-8188-a4e7b31de2f6","81b21166-1d16-4aec-910f-b382f9680f5f","81f9e1b1-71fd-45a2-9292-017420336059","8205ac1a-be22-438c-b3e0-f7aa463d3501","824601ea-5309-4ddf-bc61-486c992e309c","835cbabf-d424-4f04-89cb-1d8c0b08f1ab","83bf777b-6ee5-4e82-bd85-6e374853473a","84512e93-e51a-4c89-88dd-ecc2afc0699a","84a895b3-81ad-42e9-b54d-614c66aca856","84ea460e-bfc2-4977-aebb-32594a90693b","85680853-3899-4f21-b262-dbe3e8893779","8577ca11-d1ef-4517-846f-747a51b46f07","867c2a12-155a-4309-aff0-300c6125824c","86b559ac-3645-468b-9f43-7d961bd255d7","8779026e-22f2-4276-a7b9-695e4e569057","892c7a97-bb6b-47a5-9402-8a5293acf25b","897c7de9-ed19-4ee2-a2d5-85b75355519d","89e1831f-7c8d-46ad-b545-7b0e141b1fa7","8aaa4093-987c-4a1d-8fbd-8e1d1e495fe3","8b1ef2e6-f7a2-4db0-9589-42159cf06574","8d8b9ba9-5da4-4861-89db-348400c8ef68","8e0f3d53-2c44-474d-9787-4713b7050c28","8e4f2f4a-8039-4ba0-9b6d-beecad106136","8eb102f2-a097-496b-8975-3d2cd6e31a8d","8ecfae6d-fb77-4dfe-9f9b-f1425d8a13da","8ef8782e-cc91-4ddc-95d5-d260f1b7a518","905b10d3-5531-40bc-b5e3-84beb79f1af2","91aa9ca8-e7d7-4036-a22f-5c8c8e7fc2ce","920f5e05-04f9-4545-b26d-ea48a1f18a2f","9285d418-e4e3-40a1-b1d1-da857748bfd3","92b301e8-97fb-47a7-94a6-b858beb0a1fb","9368fe71-a18d-4580-8063-8e3f17e6cec9","9379cea2-647c-459b-af54-770e31e9bbe1","93c87fee-61ec-4ea8-bd4f-3434669835ee","93ec7040-a06c-4da5-b0b1-626399456a8a","944709d1-19c5-461e-a509-d35f5314cc8e","946d9238-09b9-474e-8481-5e734cedca7a","948eda84-20a8-442d-8a0a-ffba051904a4","94d114b9-3c47-468e-8714-ed449f90e8e4","94faca18-b471-4748-8bab-f399641cedbd","95044e07-ad37-43f6-95b0-cebe1e9f8ce0","95b8351c-9ddb-457d-9035-ad3b6d181dc7","96621df7-0c9b-41e5-a5a6-3f21a24613d5","96adc5c1-5a68-473e-9d38-85bed792c8fc","97c9d44f-1ca4-489d-a786-dc23f1fe1175","980db746-8492-4784-ab7e-f6c3b10378e1","9849e210-d94b-448b-885e-7bdffe11cfe9","9bd6a50e-945d-42d4-88de-97e83b4c3b06","9c74f902-2ef0-4269-b436-acc19aa11ea5","9c81b00b-87e1-4cce-bfc8-9583b3b8a234","9cbf8104-4fa2-4365-bc32-09eb2d1c9381","9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","9d92713b-a9c4-4b7e-87f4-c4fd443e38b5","9f454843-a34c-4619-a576-493f835993b4","9fe3b91d-3719-4260-926a-d5711bd1efc4","a06cd968-9dc5-42c5-a6e8-3d3c36dfc8c2","a18ba308-f8ab-4590-b466-daf80aa2b59c","a3aeeb23-ea47-454e-9079-05e2142e157d","a3ce7cd2-ee71-42ce-b4f7-96a81c6bd295","a45c3495-d077-4241-b1d7-72fa109d0e6b","a6385d09-ca9d-4f95-b5ba-4f50630bec35","a7002128-c4bc-48cd-bed1-46a529e69132","a7cc57e8-71f7-4536-ba7c-452e09344a18","a96905fe-9d68-4a0c-9c4e-ce250411fcd9","a9c15856-f188-45d4-80a8-7929118af59a","aa57f0d8-8cb4-4c4c-8ef4-4c4acdef25e4","ab7d0ab2-d774-415c-bd3f-a606f92ef3c3","abb94f1c-6bf3-442d-9749-eacc170b025c","ac5e071a-48a2-4a53-a1f6-5fc7b6d35280","adad636e-6844-49cb-bb07-54ff4f1a044f","add15855-56e0-4264-819c-b8e8110846aa","adfa4015-b34e-4488-99e4-b20b4dc10324","aec84261-126b-4386-b0f4-15f160ca67ae","aed9cf49-b6d3-4952-8acb-37e1eae1c31a","b26721cc-ba4b-460e-a726-17bebda4c82e","b293dea5-f7e1-4889-a56d-f823569cdff4","b3b632d3-bab8-43e4-9749-51b79e59f7dd","b3e58970-8bf0-4e37-a8f9-dd4fce60bf46","b40ee428-0e50-4a51-aca9-a9074c0486cf","b4a8aa1a-7262-4318-9579-9fff20f959a6","b4b614f7-a43d-4e57-9766-25f7fef90d68","b556af30-b2db-4273-8b3b-a5b1ec113ebb","b55fc156-b5e6-49b6-b4f1-e092d3b4f553","b5940660-7f58-4123-bb25-6f78d4e1694d","b6a4c3c9-311e-4a4f-beaf-d0012bbfbf51","b77861f3-9e86-4450-a13f-4522abb6a8ef","b78601e1-6600-408f-bc8c-52407a676ecb","b8eebc63-ef4e-4144-9327-420f594806c6","bc813ec4-3453-4fe2-a5d0-884fdb51bfc7","bcd183c8-344e-4cb8-8561-8c2e6a027897","bcd80071-6449-4036-accf-62939d2bc771","bdc8358e-29a2-4efa-a99e-6023a27df35b","bf5cf44c-c3df-4c9c-b13b-8a0108b8a106","c0981bc0-6d81-46d5-a2fc-715c6a5662b8","c2853c18-cc20-43b6-bd36-3b77725ba1d7","c2875090-e4c1-4cec-be8a-7218c8774f6b","c349f006-e1f4-498e-970a-626a724e2231","c3aa82e4-0707-4514-a535-22d6d4a7f0b2","c4b35547-a0d3-4cad-b391-177ba64d7c63","c51ad2dc-5440-4692-bdac-73968c6ad4d2","c5597192-fe4a-479a-8bf7-cdcf15d74d10","c66f7c07-f922-4abd-8805-71a0fade560f","c6b3635d-7479-4594-9803-195c9d36f4a1","c6dcef79-69bf-47eb-a0b5-7b4d6bef00fc","c6e1c64f-1094-4a24-9d3e-8103fb4d94ab","c6e6e3f3-bc85-48dc-ad18-bb08d31d7308","c7589046-9f75-46b4-bd78-c3fe0703df52","c7803b74-2f5d-47d0-a09e-c27ed98ec1a3","c7af7c66-9a6d-42c8-8695-bcd164ed856b","c8ddee14-df38-49aa-9d85-a7c6b34273a6","c999d71f-777d-4d80-9f37-37391f97acd4","caae3943-065a-475a-a6fe-f5706ce3db97","cb333cad-a0a7-4971-8f06-e4ca49e58c39","cbdf7850-c12b-44e7-9a2a-2e88994f389f","cd235f2c-1119-4002-b756-61e2983b0232","cddf4a6a-4d4e-4d8b-9631-734b807f7215","ce0c52be-896a-479c-b92b-09bf3518d332","cf1f664f-fab8-46ef-9768-c3fc897d3913","cf35dad3-c846-4c5e-91db-577efd256f78","cfa001c3-f0fc-45cd-8a71-3e35d2026e1f","cfd3be60-c380-4a63-8e12-5fd8af9b72bd","d11fa038-1162-4d93-9df5-6d5b35b8628b","d156577c-5001-4f1b-90f7-d7b21a37497b","d18985ea-8239-498e-9147-eda1d0bb8bde","d20d6d55-e1d9-462f-902a-31987fc17f06","d2c92cf6-2a73-4e89-adff-db3cb523f8e1","d2f303e3-c25c-412f-8ae4-4ec525f68736","d301dc8a-7194-46ad-bf04-43efdc78c053","d315d00d-a3eb-4c0f-9554-c1395585910f","d3bd5582-331f-4b89-96d8-d988dabaecd2","d3c6617c-2925-40b2-aa72-9b0b6c5e83d4","d405b9b8-3fd3-4230-a3d3-ccdd34abd185","d5ff3294-0ecd-48eb-b9dd-a2c0282a055a","d6f9dd1e-cee9-48ff-a7e7-71d7a7b8f61d","d7c49d74-0c9c-470b-94ad-c7ccaa111eaf","d7f7d93d-fda2-48cd-89a3-7b5c35ec6480","d8ab6193-0742-4b7e-99ea-f1131b5fc36f","d96f8ae8-4753-4f7b-9ec5-3238eca05841","d9794536-257f-4a12-8d46-a7c0c649fb97","dab486f0-dfe1-46a8-b0d8-32e2a200b8e8","db8eb9e3-f6e6-4be4-b6d2-d135a6c3e9ac","dc0f107c-d6af-40f2-b8fd-d6a8264071a5","dc9b6179-78d1-4eec-9df7-47aadc6c4002","dd99547d-81d1-4764-ba78-52a1cddf906d","ddada193-97b9-4ccc-8a51-bfbea77a0c06","df6dd614-6785-4c3a-b6c7-1e091a751c64","e06bafea-36a4-40ac-8e47-2a2619fd46fd","e1083f09-5ed1-4bdf-8ac5-3c65482b8e5f","e1955bc5-123d-4ca0-b875-2d75b1f718f1","e1bbca7c-14db-40cf-a128-0219f12466a3","e256486b-ee32-4d0f-9cba-d02bf4bd780a","e27aa94c-fa47-4a58-bc17-1e5d3387b739","e2a4561f-b8bf-4ca9-9990-3b885eaf5c2b","e2f38cc3-06ff-4db2-8aad-a537c1e1d0c8","e446ef0a-2a74-42bf-bcd6-2b793506650e","e4aba04c-81ff-438c-a506-881ff2436c82","e500f58c-3afd-4143-b4d2-f60500bf9023","e53f3cca-ca53-449c-9f09-737f317fb169","e57d61a5-e3ec-423d-ad96-243fbfae502b","e6d36e44-00e2-4f9e-95b1-e892e44117eb","e6e7e00b-0ede-4741-8419-066a93e431cd","e6f33250-4650-42ce-96e8-87ce7eebc853","e70df749-9305-44b3-8a30-defc332a7fa4","e7a8eb39-66a7-4777-a0d6-cfb00f8f0798","e8fbbd18-0c64-4437-9ea9-4b4877081943","e9029bad-f0af-4178-8545-61b8bf20d98f","ea0bba2c-7a56-40f2-afac-00f638b54fc3","ea51c75b-4b85-48fb-bbb7-8fde23c110aa","ea6c8861-7a39-4e19-8e71-58720131fa8d","eac2c9bd-6ddc-48dc-92e0-405c318acfb0","eb7f5240-b11f-4c58-9681-91c05d2c3f50","eb84cbb3-24d1-4565-9ec1-8bd3b9d4bec9","ec990258-7999-4c93-81af-59b6ab2c65df","ed2c35d4-102a-4b73-8382-2ac35610faed","edf6b48c-90dc-4757-814e-999556997808","eec20343-5ffa-486c-b431-59ca5e4568d4","ef391115-fde1-44aa-ab00-abb8e2e7ec82","efb7c5ac-4ac5-4964-80cb-f95ebaa0e04c","f0a80593-3eca-497d-afa0-90d16a414e1d","f121b53e-c2bd-4ce5-878c-fd5a64863273","f1307eae-cbfb-4f04-b6cc-3facd9e296d6","f19a484a-77bd-4389-8266-523228328091","f1ba13f7-7414-47ce-9df3-a6aa0902c1b9","f1f602c9-64cd-4bfc-855c-fb8060a9c483","f24f8cd0-0ca1-49cf-8cf1-4a5e6b938fe3","f25f2d19-18b4-4e7e-ad7b-8f30a193b3d6","f267ac1f-eff8-417a-8920-f8d37e384f79","f289c668-0c40-41e6-82af-ae6829b262d4","f319102d-533a-41ff-9f08-6bda6778bb7e","f40851bc-e6e8-4605-ba83-f44d932b4760","f4c53608-9890-4b9f-89a3-7c1028bc1e05","f502d85e-d523-4b8c-9dec-469aa08204df","f5653eaf-7d13-4c91-93c7-e30daca2ec3a","f5876a8c-263e-4134-a5b2-ba2453ed9080","f58af8d2-a271-4586-b2b4-1b399c9f84de","f5c77efa-f72b-424c-a810-81cd552ba3de","f62defd3-7975-4edf-8f34-40a36b487ac8","f6e3366d-13bc-4a60-94b6-f77a2c2032c0","f75dd4aa-d0bc-4078-857d-76a41f9df08f","f9720bd0-18fb-4774-96e6-eca25490f73e","fa1e38b4-4ced-4f4b-9a7b-b1b89ff13da7","fa93085f-260f-4f91-af1c-c85c03ca06fa","faaca14c-514a-4f25-897a-cd9bbc31d5d0","fb4d21e7-be93-4775-905f-977427db28c4","fc91133d-e4b6-4458-8d6c-cb1af7bcd97e","fdc662ec-5ed7-4d04-8993-6144ff01abc2","fe4e9bc0-2802-4dd8-97e4-27704fad2a1b","fec4e8d2-6a2f-4046-b9d4-85a831f76655","fee252e0-d871-44c1-8917-1fd2d148377a","ff092982-3b6e-4f4c-8194-6b8201ee1246","ff4c3069-118e-4f08-aa39-6394130a8ec4","oil-c3728ff063420cf8"],"entries":[{"id":"food_products:entry:ghee:ghee","name":"Ghee","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 4 extracted labels.","occurrences":476,"article_count":417,"event_count":465,"article_ids":["008cc0e4-d7d7-475f-80d8-d81621e7b862","0109eea0-3adc-4177-a6f7-e3bc31bf237d","030df41e-ccfc-4023-a026-89cc92bf3253","03ea9124-befd-4983-bcdc-147e3ed3bf73","04c00967-a247-4802-b3c2-3f266885c385","05375704-5b45-4e0a-b388-9944c0c5fc9f","05937ca4-de64-422f-ba56-878f6152027c","0932679a-fe82-4a1e-949e-9d4fd17ed2a0","0a113e2a-26d3-45e4-9064-7cfa2f39230b","0a23e582-3dac-4091-bf36-a08d511a3763","0a342064-5378-4aff-b4aa-34ae5c1ab66b","0aa842b8-1ac9-4243-a8b6-5d98d32d6089","0af3703f-23ec-4f8f-a1b6-45b4adb68b12","0b5a50e0-df3b-42ea-83c6-80bc16cf39fb","0d14295d-a954-4163-8974-ecb51bd464e8","0d96e6b1-57f6-4555-8711-703a6c818eea","0e464dfa-d504-4806-9005-c1ba38758bf8","0e518ac8-dc53-4c79-938a-bd26c1142eeb","0ea7c6a7-d2c1-498f-aa00-f3fc942206ed","0ef4d3e4-844c-47ee-a430-8f171ec4c000","0f7493be-b335-4851-9029-9e87ba0da155","0facca96-d90c-4f21-ba98-356f7f6b1622","102a4953-33a2-4842-827e-987e3bb6ce7a","10f36230-190b-4b13-8cfc-8d12c2f37080","141518ef-ce68-4969-bb2a-66f56733fab2","15f9d255-f348-4fb7-ba3d-003ab6adcfb2","164f43df-a069-4197-9854-e7bd9fc78fae","178d6244-50cd-4bea-8e16-f951f6227a8c","18f4411e-1d84-42c5-835a-97436ad30c7c","1931e9b4-edf1-42ec-a9c4-00ff0cbcff9a","1933f8f5-8812-4e24-85bd-cdbdc83f929e","194f3e22-f4b6-483b-9333-762c3a3b6b9d","1a066d87-0093-4ca8-9c10-84c004b76c48","1a806023-ac1d-4da2-924e-25821c2554f5","1a87f314-ec7e-4407-96f2-0995e8d26fc0","1addfba0-b7e9-4722-85be-a642cdf63571","1ae756d4-675e-4a08-bc7d-ba6a3e922d5d","1b1069d2-3f50-4dd3-a8bd-0aeed6bacf98","1b74e29d-f583-4ee4-96bc-e93553c915b3","1bb0d3e5-6f04-4d91-a899-8b6f59bc228a","1c7ea343-020a-4266-9854-b12ebfa2cf50","1c8fe57c-2cee-4f73-a5f3-6ee4051024e7","1de4a13b-1497-421e-b5bc-a8ebbc7a3b18","1de65c17-36dd-4ba6-ada6-bcd98b556aad","1df33743-1016-49ce-981b-862125c0893f","1e6b9f5b-a065-4242-ae58-1f105455955f","1fe9639d-5c39-472e-94a7-73ac2b03bfce","2010c6e2-c9cb-4a3e-b22b-8cabf1044074","2013c452-d1c8-41a0-abea-92e26d231790","21fb2b00-9b86-4924-9a0d-248f976cfd93","22261df7-8974-447f-a1cf-192c59528f64","2255e304-d6ef-4707-b594-cbc3955019ec","229a7f40-f956-476e-8c84-3fd9ed3d6c29","22bf4101-c33b-4711-b6e3-379968f7c217","23a5dd2a-a53c-44b8-8b86-37e04d4cf1ee","23ff1efe-782a-4174-8f33-41a3ff0e8c44","2499d49c-748f-41d8-84d9-eed7a66ad43a","255ac21d-c17e-4926-9dad-13db7698ed72","2679a7a3-abde-4979-ac6e-5cf24113e0db","268e5866-7aea-4546-934f-f105a70b1096","26ac5726-fd69-42b8-a80e-6a71b91ba466","26b11917-4e55-41d5-aeb1-64e8b44bedba","2719a94d-d523-4fef-bfd9-a1bef16dd951","28a03096-e60c-4adb-b4fa-55f0bd28a95d","292b562c-132b-47cc-9030-d2544e801e7e","29a173b3-4587-4257-9c93-2f0c483079c5","2a59f77c-89ba-49fe-be6c-b3c9756a9940","2ad1f047-985c-4c59-aa13-749fa75bcba9","2b442757-da6a-46e5-ae37-b083e00062d3","2c075e82-3fe3-4b95-a68a-f0fad41e51f5","2d8a95d1-8554-4194-b427-4239c3f9ad5b","2f23ec7d-e712-46f5-ae1c-5e7634725242","2fc5c9f1-64d2-498f-8f7a-96d94b926f6d","2fe1bef6-e797-4d9f-bb5b-6f936d7a55dc","2fede3c0-46a7-46e8-a776-5a6fd6d3f08e","301bb818-ff44-4346-9ffe-ad58bf13cfb2","31cae76c-aa62-4328-bd40-368275f60e9f","31f1f824-c698-4b97-a52a-1a1136a9ac6e","3278338f-1fa0-4045-9701-e237d5ad0930","3282adec-c328-4317-a091-a126587d78de","32bc8e29-1313-4d9b-86ff-8c3bb665f057","33326887-4ed0-4562-a0ac-b889d6ad53a9","336a89c4-d98a-4242-8803-4d479689bc4d","3401730f-3850-4c7d-884f-dcdb1d086c42","34b8b88f-e283-46cd-ba6e-f373dc3d4395","34dc1c1f-d12c-4230-bb1c-e41b6961f288","3624ed70-d464-4caa-9b4e-4dfc2ed435dc","368930a7-2085-43bd-bb79-62d471c9e75c","36a70fc6-de5a-494c-9dc5-801fe7a7a53d","3797cfc4-05a5-422b-b823-ed3bb850f540","3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","3865528e-cbb8-4615-af7d-f9ab01e9fe4d","38d24327-d93d-472b-99ac-246351c7dbfd","3911de79-cbfd-4eaa-9311-207b452faa93","394a5ff5-76f3-4885-87ed-4a6879611c22","39a9fb26-817d-404e-a150-4e4c5ebc037c","39e61860-2a60-448c-838e-a7f01e4d0c5c","3c0e9d23-f858-47eb-8e7a-23db1d42822a","3cdd0ffb-841b-4883-9b1a-df7b28022554","3d6b98eb-c79e-460c-883b-9c997ffea009","3e2829b3-2380-49cb-a370-77a313e8eaa1","3e325b99-7611-4f89-8963-7f79c5ac4105","3f674523-5416-4b89-8cab-fe3ddf3c9e7e","411b1d1a-7b18-4425-90f0-da2c296625eb","4216dab3-b436-422a-a6ee-74b5858f7aa2","4260e03f-c3cd-480c-827c-7ebe3a09e913","4299b01d-c5ab-4283-ae2d-31aa1fdbbfec","432f2c6e-3092-44cd-bf1b-54249b31ad6b","438c4f31-19bd-4ff3-bed4-035569ec6cbf","43de8661-2844-46b7-bb39-15eb17f6b82e","43e20f96-27cb-4f67-b7e5-6228aea8e7b6","445ff19b-5429-4a55-be3f-c4b03481b04f","4469e268-1b01-49b7-a436-ea4a88ba6269","451d9824-7933-403d-beaa-1ac6398509c9","45fdd40d-5bc4-4fe7-9eb9-883c55f14a70","46441742-607f-484f-80fe-b1334048144a","4661fe17-e88d-41ab-a8c6-9aefcbbaed5c","471bc3da-bbd4-417c-875a-595a713be7fd","4726ed7e-d61a-4a2c-9e05-59cbaa4f1bf0","473ed916-1979-4222-b1e8-38d39c51fe03","47635cd8-696c-4adf-94ed-338f084a3d62","484a6113-0a95-4624-8291-c00710260e4d","4974f73f-37bc-4300-8d31-d97ca337365b","4a021f95-539e-4217-98a0-d651be9a3b47","4a638904-2bcf-4037-8afd-ec6e5b0b6b11","4c67d899-fab5-4e78-9274-526d6a4fe0bb","4cd73621-691c-4866-91c1-0b99d0d1a89a","4d6ab7d0-4e16-4d1b-aa49-7f453c9352b6","4d7063c6-5201-4ce1-89ed-75ee21d51b98","4eb18b90-e310-48db-9531-68b146420749","4f3026f8-7217-4bf9-af6e-71bcad8bb1c5","4fa075c9-a30f-47e5-8f09-158017bfd6d6","502ff9a1-ac00-4ef2-96cb-0a0614085766","504dd102-6089-4fcb-a066-0006720862a7","508d009a-650f-4e40-b03d-ebef9d2c069e","5118358f-2777-4bfd-a761-adb4bc1da763","51a534c1-9193-4b8c-bbd2-b4e368930ead","5245dc0a-5d68-4a00-ad89-6255f3bee930","526515f5-4a82-4b0b-9e1c-7f3a2aa4cde4","52bd3a8a-1c92-484d-8be6-5f7e4a7274e1","534ab39c-32c3-46ea-a742-5095170a0003","5374dadc-cd7f-41df-b8d9-8ef7c10ec693","53f8ec9a-900f-481f-bfb5-a6ca452416ed","5406e730-2d78-47b4-ba27-fc933e691eab","54637d34-f16e-4e98-84c1-681a0fca559c","54686005-b842-4cc5-82b1-0276e36a42b6","550bda80-b5be-488a-89f6-64b9698b4033","554708da-6872-4a1b-91cc-3beeb59fbf2e","55552c00-e696-4ac2-951e-156364cb1337","5710a503-9fbe-46ae-abd5-2663069b70db","57b2326c-e877-4995-82fc-221eda139718","5804b97c-c416-49d1-9fbd-5bb52c0595dd","58163259-bc87-4025-a6cc-f3a0848b52cf","58679f65-396b-4b1f-b725-9907ebc9f038","58ac029e-4204-42c4-8ff3-6dbd84dd382a","58c8e8bf-9cbd-46dd-8a8b-b1b5cbb0d58d","590fff58-7ba9-4a5b-8232-4c27d67f13b1","5a7bde0b-59e0-4f86-9b63-2bbebb593d41","5c86116b-5fae-45a9-b467-01fc8b26a166","5d222c9b-8733-4d3b-abaa-59f77da35546","5f6c5fd0-a2f8-4bfe-9ac4-a8d06bc8640a","5fa4530c-d60b-48c1-b6b2-371abff6d77a","60ccacb1-7c41-4259-b651-bfbf60e7b53a","6135126e-45b3-4fe7-a80f-82248b08ea7b","61a00782-20f7-4170-b4e2-d9d9157b3a3c","620bfde0-ec72-4b52-bfa4-e06ce3b56960","62bc0e3c-1d90-4688-bc1b-e00f620c5c8c","634a0a0f-0899-427f-9396-6cc3c5442643","6411a3a1-2932-41eb-b497-f9a2400de74c","64902247-dbff-448d-987f-c89ac2e30538","66bb816a-1961-4e45-8460-9328304c7956","6721b632-2b4f-492a-840d-bb05d2a9f1af","672ecfdb-cb9d-485d-8fc1-76e6a8269fe7","67c4a0dd-5f32-4dde-b733-4a4a9e5dfafb","68753b50-8fe7-4499-bb2d-ddfcc7e16c94","6901ef7b-f98a-4b3a-b622-85196fe10ffb","696bb9a6-aa69-4de4-a566-5df21482bc51","6a44ea24-a3bf-4ad8-96b1-5ae56cefb84c","6ab671c9-310c-4d88-bd88-0251180b2345","6cf864fb-5956-4416-a1c5-f42153e66ec4","6ee56cf3-78f2-4420-bede-08f76397b2fb","6f00035b-1437-428d-895c-a234866e29e0","6f4adcf4-c63b-41c9-b7f6-0b0f4e75c857","706246bb-b5c8-4d73-81fa-2e93d040c762","706f0136-7ae5-45f2-b804-e3a8c9a14d1c","70b9c7ef-3983-40dd-b904-5607537ff37f","71196507-ad87-406f-a4df-edc8a14b1575","73066633-67a8-4240-8c5a-3c4ae29b486d","73369c4a-c44b-4b7a-b3cc-07766ccb4e2a","73e97a89-5b5f-4104-bc6a-50b8f564040a","747400a0-bfad-4fa2-8004-06f237d1c543","75eac450-5d76-45da-975a-a47f1515ca01","75f7eb04-35fe-48ce-af4a-d0ccf3067076","77ed2567-2595-48f0-891b-a753164f2866","7855cb39-b177-4d3b-bd72-0a18afd5415b","79cfeedd-0cef-4026-962d-c86d241c4e56","7a539249-77a2-4e2b-a29f-6952304d80d7","7a59b547-cf09-4b46-bbfe-d7a7f34b7cfc","7a707681-5edc-461c-b5a8-0057a374f3cc","7b3b345d-0902-4461-a6bc-747c26feb7f2","7c914cb3-8ba1-4768-ac56-a051b75a6e8b","7ddc7283-670a-4dfb-9e38-a11aa0c579c2","8151434e-f600-47a9-93df-16b483e88961","815dcb75-691c-4066-a898-b7ed46fdbdf2","816a43e1-6b33-4a27-a385-9d12dd8e924f","8187d86e-f46c-4e26-8188-a4e7b31de2f6","81b21166-1d16-4aec-910f-b382f9680f5f","81f9e1b1-71fd-45a2-9292-017420336059","8205ac1a-be22-438c-b3e0-f7aa463d3501","824601ea-5309-4ddf-bc61-486c992e309c","835cbabf-d424-4f04-89cb-1d8c0b08f1ab","83bf777b-6ee5-4e82-bd85-6e374853473a","84512e93-e51a-4c89-88dd-ecc2afc0699a","84a895b3-81ad-42e9-b54d-614c66aca856","84ea460e-bfc2-4977-aebb-32594a90693b","85680853-3899-4f21-b262-dbe3e8893779","8577ca11-d1ef-4517-846f-747a51b46f07","867c2a12-155a-4309-aff0-300c6125824c","86b559ac-3645-468b-9f43-7d961bd255d7","8779026e-22f2-4276-a7b9-695e4e569057","892c7a97-bb6b-47a5-9402-8a5293acf25b","897c7de9-ed19-4ee2-a2d5-85b75355519d","89e1831f-7c8d-46ad-b545-7b0e141b1fa7","8aaa4093-987c-4a1d-8fbd-8e1d1e495fe3","8b1ef2e6-f7a2-4db0-9589-42159cf06574","8d8b9ba9-5da4-4861-89db-348400c8ef68","8e0f3d53-2c44-474d-9787-4713b7050c28","8e4f2f4a-8039-4ba0-9b6d-beecad106136","8eb102f2-a097-496b-8975-3d2cd6e31a8d","8ecfae6d-fb77-4dfe-9f9b-f1425d8a13da","8ef8782e-cc91-4ddc-95d5-d260f1b7a518","905b10d3-5531-40bc-b5e3-84beb79f1af2","91aa9ca8-e7d7-4036-a22f-5c8c8e7fc2ce","920f5e05-04f9-4545-b26d-ea48a1f18a2f","9285d418-e4e3-40a1-b1d1-da857748bfd3","92b301e8-97fb-47a7-94a6-b858beb0a1fb","9368fe71-a18d-4580-8063-8e3f17e6cec9","9379cea2-647c-459b-af54-770e31e9bbe1","93c87fee-61ec-4ea8-bd4f-3434669835ee","93ec7040-a06c-4da5-b0b1-626399456a8a","944709d1-19c5-461e-a509-d35f5314cc8e","946d9238-09b9-474e-8481-5e734cedca7a","948eda84-20a8-442d-8a0a-ffba051904a4","94d114b9-3c47-468e-8714-ed449f90e8e4","94faca18-b471-4748-8bab-f399641cedbd","95044e07-ad37-43f6-95b0-cebe1e9f8ce0","95b8351c-9ddb-457d-9035-ad3b6d181dc7","96621df7-0c9b-41e5-a5a6-3f21a24613d5","96adc5c1-5a68-473e-9d38-85bed792c8fc","97c9d44f-1ca4-489d-a786-dc23f1fe1175","980db746-8492-4784-ab7e-f6c3b10378e1","9849e210-d94b-448b-885e-7bdffe11cfe9","9bd6a50e-945d-42d4-88de-97e83b4c3b06","9c74f902-2ef0-4269-b436-acc19aa11ea5","9c81b00b-87e1-4cce-bfc8-9583b3b8a234","9cbf8104-4fa2-4365-bc32-09eb2d1c9381","9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","9d92713b-a9c4-4b7e-87f4-c4fd443e38b5","9f454843-a34c-4619-a576-493f835993b4","9fe3b91d-3719-4260-926a-d5711bd1efc4","a06cd968-9dc5-42c5-a6e8-3d3c36dfc8c2","a18ba308-f8ab-4590-b466-daf80aa2b59c","a3aeeb23-ea47-454e-9079-05e2142e157d","a3ce7cd2-ee71-42ce-b4f7-96a81c6bd295","a45c3495-d077-4241-b1d7-72fa109d0e6b","a6385d09-ca9d-4f95-b5ba-4f50630bec35","a7002128-c4bc-48cd-bed1-46a529e69132","a7cc57e8-71f7-4536-ba7c-452e09344a18","a96905fe-9d68-4a0c-9c4e-ce250411fcd9","a9c15856-f188-45d4-80a8-7929118af59a","aa57f0d8-8cb4-4c4c-8ef4-4c4acdef25e4","ab7d0ab2-d774-415c-bd3f-a606f92ef3c3","abb94f1c-6bf3-442d-9749-eacc170b025c","ac5e071a-48a2-4a53-a1f6-5fc7b6d35280","adad636e-6844-49cb-bb07-54ff4f1a044f","add15855-56e0-4264-819c-b8e8110846aa","adfa4015-b34e-4488-99e4-b20b4dc10324","aec84261-126b-4386-b0f4-15f160ca67ae","aed9cf49-b6d3-4952-8acb-37e1eae1c31a","b26721cc-ba4b-460e-a726-17bebda4c82e","b293dea5-f7e1-4889-a56d-f823569cdff4","b3b632d3-bab8-43e4-9749-51b79e59f7dd","b3e58970-8bf0-4e37-a8f9-dd4fce60bf46","b40ee428-0e50-4a51-aca9-a9074c0486cf","b4a8aa1a-7262-4318-9579-9fff20f959a6","b4b614f7-a43d-4e57-9766-25f7fef90d68","b556af30-b2db-4273-8b3b-a5b1ec113ebb","b55fc156-b5e6-49b6-b4f1-e092d3b4f553","b5940660-7f58-4123-bb25-6f78d4e1694d","b6a4c3c9-311e-4a4f-beaf-d0012bbfbf51","b77861f3-9e86-4450-a13f-4522abb6a8ef","b78601e1-6600-408f-bc8c-52407a676ecb","b8eebc63-ef4e-4144-9327-420f594806c6","bc813ec4-3453-4fe2-a5d0-884fdb51bfc7","bcd183c8-344e-4cb8-8561-8c2e6a027897","bcd80071-6449-4036-accf-62939d2bc771","bdc8358e-29a2-4efa-a99e-6023a27df35b","bf5cf44c-c3df-4c9c-b13b-8a0108b8a106","c0981bc0-6d81-46d5-a2fc-715c6a5662b8","c2853c18-cc20-43b6-bd36-3b77725ba1d7","c2875090-e4c1-4cec-be8a-7218c8774f6b","c349f006-e1f4-498e-970a-626a724e2231","c3aa82e4-0707-4514-a535-22d6d4a7f0b2","c4b35547-a0d3-4cad-b391-177ba64d7c63","c51ad2dc-5440-4692-bdac-73968c6ad4d2","c5597192-fe4a-479a-8bf7-cdcf15d74d10","c66f7c07-f922-4abd-8805-71a0fade560f","c6b3635d-7479-4594-9803-195c9d36f4a1","c6dcef79-69bf-47eb-a0b5-7b4d6bef00fc","c6e1c64f-1094-4a24-9d3e-8103fb4d94ab","c6e6e3f3-bc85-48dc-ad18-bb08d31d7308","c7589046-9f75-46b4-bd78-c3fe0703df52","c7803b74-2f5d-47d0-a09e-c27ed98ec1a3","c7af7c66-9a6d-42c8-8695-bcd164ed856b","c8ddee14-df38-49aa-9d85-a7c6b34273a6","c999d71f-777d-4d80-9f37-37391f97acd4","caae3943-065a-475a-a6fe-f5706ce3db97","cb333cad-a0a7-4971-8f06-e4ca49e58c39","cbdf7850-c12b-44e7-9a2a-2e88994f389f","cd235f2c-1119-4002-b756-61e2983b0232","cddf4a6a-4d4e-4d8b-9631-734b807f7215","ce0c52be-896a-479c-b92b-09bf3518d332","cf1f664f-fab8-46ef-9768-c3fc897d3913","cf35dad3-c846-4c5e-91db-577efd256f78","cfa001c3-f0fc-45cd-8a71-3e35d2026e1f","cfd3be60-c380-4a63-8e12-5fd8af9b72bd","d11fa038-1162-4d93-9df5-6d5b35b8628b","d156577c-5001-4f1b-90f7-d7b21a37497b","d18985ea-8239-498e-9147-eda1d0bb8bde","d20d6d55-e1d9-462f-902a-31987fc17f06","d2c92cf6-2a73-4e89-adff-db3cb523f8e1","d2f303e3-c25c-412f-8ae4-4ec525f68736","d301dc8a-7194-46ad-bf04-43efdc78c053","d315d00d-a3eb-4c0f-9554-c1395585910f","d3bd5582-331f-4b89-96d8-d988dabaecd2","d3c6617c-2925-40b2-aa72-9b0b6c5e83d4","d405b9b8-3fd3-4230-a3d3-ccdd34abd185","d5ff3294-0ecd-48eb-b9dd-a2c0282a055a","d6f9dd1e-cee9-48ff-a7e7-71d7a7b8f61d","d7c49d74-0c9c-470b-94ad-c7ccaa111eaf","d7f7d93d-fda2-48cd-89a3-7b5c35ec6480","d8ab6193-0742-4b7e-99ea-f1131b5fc36f","d96f8ae8-4753-4f7b-9ec5-3238eca05841","d9794536-257f-4a12-8d46-a7c0c649fb97","dab486f0-dfe1-46a8-b0d8-32e2a200b8e8","db8eb9e3-f6e6-4be4-b6d2-d135a6c3e9ac","dc0f107c-d6af-40f2-b8fd-d6a8264071a5","dc9b6179-78d1-4eec-9df7-47aadc6c4002","dd99547d-81d1-4764-ba78-52a1cddf906d","ddada193-97b9-4ccc-8a51-bfbea77a0c06","df6dd614-6785-4c3a-b6c7-1e091a751c64","e06bafea-36a4-40ac-8e47-2a2619fd46fd","e1083f09-5ed1-4bdf-8ac5-3c65482b8e5f","e1955bc5-123d-4ca0-b875-2d75b1f718f1","e1bbca7c-14db-40cf-a128-0219f12466a3","e256486b-ee32-4d0f-9cba-d02bf4bd780a","e27aa94c-fa47-4a58-bc17-1e5d3387b739","e2a4561f-b8bf-4ca9-9990-3b885eaf5c2b","e2f38cc3-06ff-4db2-8aad-a537c1e1d0c8","e446ef0a-2a74-42bf-bcd6-2b793506650e","e4aba04c-81ff-438c-a506-881ff2436c82","e500f58c-3afd-4143-b4d2-f60500bf9023","e53f3cca-ca53-449c-9f09-737f317fb169","e57d61a5-e3ec-423d-ad96-243fbfae502b","e6d36e44-00e2-4f9e-95b1-e892e44117eb","e6e7e00b-0ede-4741-8419-066a93e431cd","e6f33250-4650-42ce-96e8-87ce7eebc853","e70df749-9305-44b3-8a30-defc332a7fa4","e7a8eb39-66a7-4777-a0d6-cfb00f8f0798","e8fbbd18-0c64-4437-9ea9-4b4877081943","e9029bad-f0af-4178-8545-61b8bf20d98f","ea0bba2c-7a56-40f2-afac-00f638b54fc3","ea51c75b-4b85-48fb-bbb7-8fde23c110aa","ea6c8861-7a39-4e19-8e71-58720131fa8d","eac2c9bd-6ddc-48dc-92e0-405c318acfb0","eb7f5240-b11f-4c58-9681-91c05d2c3f50","eb84cbb3-24d1-4565-9ec1-8bd3b9d4bec9","ec990258-7999-4c93-81af-59b6ab2c65df","ed2c35d4-102a-4b73-8382-2ac35610faed","edf6b48c-90dc-4757-814e-999556997808","eec20343-5ffa-486c-b431-59ca5e4568d4","ef391115-fde1-44aa-ab00-abb8e2e7ec82","efb7c5ac-4ac5-4964-80cb-f95ebaa0e04c","f0a80593-3eca-497d-afa0-90d16a414e1d","f121b53e-c2bd-4ce5-878c-fd5a64863273","f1307eae-cbfb-4f04-b6cc-3facd9e296d6","f19a484a-77bd-4389-8266-523228328091","f1ba13f7-7414-47ce-9df3-a6aa0902c1b9","f1f602c9-64cd-4bfc-855c-fb8060a9c483","f24f8cd0-0ca1-49cf-8cf1-4a5e6b938fe3","f25f2d19-18b4-4e7e-ad7b-8f30a193b3d6","f267ac1f-eff8-417a-8920-f8d37e384f79","f289c668-0c40-41e6-82af-ae6829b262d4","f319102d-533a-41ff-9f08-6bda6778bb7e","f40851bc-e6e8-4605-ba83-f44d932b4760","f4c53608-9890-4b9f-89a3-7c1028bc1e05","f502d85e-d523-4b8c-9dec-469aa08204df","f5653eaf-7d13-4c91-93c7-e30daca2ec3a","f5876a8c-263e-4134-a5b2-ba2453ed9080","f58af8d2-a271-4586-b2b4-1b399c9f84de","f5c77efa-f72b-424c-a810-81cd552ba3de","f62defd3-7975-4edf-8f34-40a36b487ac8","f6e3366d-13bc-4a60-94b6-f77a2c2032c0","f75dd4aa-d0bc-4078-857d-76a41f9df08f","f9720bd0-18fb-4774-96e6-eca25490f73e","fa1e38b4-4ced-4f4b-9a7b-b1b89ff13da7","fa93085f-260f-4f91-af1c-c85c03ca06fa","faaca14c-514a-4f25-897a-cd9bbc31d5d0","fb4d21e7-be93-4775-905f-977427db28c4","fc91133d-e4b6-4458-8d6c-cb1af7bcd97e","fdc662ec-5ed7-4d04-8993-6144ff01abc2","fe4e9bc0-2802-4dd8-97e4-27704fad2a1b","fec4e8d2-6a2f-4046-b9d4-85a831f76655","fee252e0-d871-44c1-8917-1fd2d148377a","ff092982-3b6e-4f4c-8194-6b8201ee1246","ff4c3069-118e-4f08-aa39-6394130a8ec4","oil-c3728ff063420cf8"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant","fflo:EdibleOil","fflo:Food","fflo:Ghee","fkg:Food","fkg:Ghee","fkg:Ingredient","fso:FoodProduct","fso:Ghee","ghee"],"aliases":["fake Nandini ghee","ghee","spurious ghee","vegetable ghee"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:ghee:ghee-or-vanaspati-product","name":"Ghee or vanaspati product","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["438c4f31-19bd-4ff3-bed4-035569ec6cbf","79f059b8-00b2-4345-ad46-440c7bc371df"],"ontology_types":["fkg:Food"],"aliases":["vanaspati ghee"]}]},{"id":"food_products:group:oil","name":"Oil","definition":"The parent food category for every normalized edible-oil product in this release.","occurrences":203,"article_count":142,"event_count":145,"article_ids":["15f9d255-f348-4fb7-ba3d-003ab6adcfb2","23a5dd2a-a53c-44b8-8b86-37e04d4cf1ee","46441742-607f-484f-80fe-b1334048144a","4726ed7e-d61a-4a2c-9e05-59cbaa4f1bf0","6f00035b-1437-428d-895c-a234866e29e0","8151434e-f600-47a9-93df-16b483e88961","e256486b-ee32-4d0f-9cba-d02bf4bd780a","e6d36e44-00e2-4f9e-95b1-e892e44117eb","eec20343-5ffa-486c-b431-59ca5e4568d4","oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-055a850c7fce9512","oil-05aa031a4b58524e","oil-06d5928124689ba0","oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-081117bbf714a215","oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0","oil-0d7b13a282f9b466","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","oil-13fd5c31e278a577","oil-156fd0980ec51fe6","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-1852e8a212bd5903","oil-1c3f4e35a1252449","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-23d97461886d2622","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-42c4efcdce45e35d","oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-438415c185832786","oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-4b88eb2520f8cc22","oil-4bd4c6831e9c7077","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-5413f17944743156","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-63426d939d718e7f","oil-63f43befc46e25fa","oil-66b89ef48f4536a9","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-7269f661e72c703f","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-7ced813eb9eb1314","oil-7ed3f9582cae741d","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-846611108e27fafb","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-86a403aef71f924e","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-8e1ede70f7533502","oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77","oil-94951aba738c80b3","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-9c21da748413e6f9","oil-9f582ea75e0eddfb","oil-a0831d014f72baf3","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-a882a3e8b7aeb487","oil-a9685f88d15906f6","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-b434a85e1e9196d0","oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-bd1df718191f8f6e","oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","oil-c0e8fd0149fa83c4","oil-c1a2f95596a3b00d","oil-c2fa50179af284f7","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-c4d815318f8299b0","oil-c72d68cafd2478be","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-c94e003c369b3450","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-ce4031737a7654b3","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-d276b566dce62194","oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","oil-d479413f1e610f85","oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-e1cd585e16b9635b","oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","oil-e72f16ac2686175c","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f1693a0670f7b784","oil-f5b6386895404f0b","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-f96a10806285c261","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-fba2e5ff157abb74","oil-fc5474312cf8529f","oil-fc714f38909e4348","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","oil-fcda56b4bb45ffd3","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9","oil-ff34df409a4806f1"],"entries":[{"id":"food_products:entry:oil:generic-edible-oil","name":"Generic edible oil","definition":"An edible-oil product reported without a more specific botanical source.","occurrences":54,"article_count":54,"event_count":54,"article_ids":["23a5dd2a-a53c-44b8-8b86-37e04d4cf1ee","4726ed7e-d61a-4a2c-9e05-59cbaa4f1bf0","6f00035b-1437-428d-895c-a234866e29e0","8151434e-f600-47a9-93df-16b483e88961","e256486b-ee32-4d0f-9cba-d02bf4bd780a","oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-05aa031a4b58524e","oil-06d5928124689ba0","oil-081117bbf714a215","oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-156fd0980ec51fe6","oil-1852e8a212bd5903","oil-1c3f4e35a1252449","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-4bd4c6831e9c7077","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-63f43befc46e25fa","oil-66b89ef48f4536a9","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-7ced813eb9eb1314","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-846611108e27fafb","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-c4d815318f8299b0","oil-c72d68cafd2478be","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-ce4031737a7654b3","oil-d479413f1e610f85","oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","oil-e1cd585e16b9635b","oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-fba2e5ff157abb74","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","oil-fcda56b4bb45ffd3","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant","fflo:EdibleOil","fflo:Food","fkg:EdibleOil","fkg:Food","fso:EdibleOil"],"aliases":["adulterated oils","edible oil","Edible Oils","gingelly oil","loose oil","miscible oil","oil","vegetable oil"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:oil:mustard-oil","name":"Mustard oil","definition":"Oil produced from mustard seed, including named mustard-oil brands.","occurrences":37,"article_count":34,"event_count":34,"article_ids":["oil-081117bbf714a215","oil-13fd5c31e278a577","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-7269f661e72c703f","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-7ed3f9582cae741d","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77","oil-94951aba738c80b3","oil-9f582ea75e0eddfb","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-b434a85e1e9196d0","oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","oil-c0e8fd0149fa83c4","oil-c1a2f95596a3b00d","oil-c2fa50179af284f7","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-d276b566dce62194","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-f5b6386895404f0b","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f96a10806285c261"],"ontology_types":["edible_oil","fflo:EdibleOil","fflo:Food","fkg:EdibleOil","fkg:Food"],"aliases":["Fortune Kacchi Ghani Mustard Oil","Fortune Sarso Oil","mustard oil","Ranthambore brand mustard oil"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:oil:soybean-oil","name":"Soybean oil","definition":"Oil produced from soybean; spelling and refined-product variants are combined.","occurrences":26,"article_count":24,"event_count":25,"article_ids":["4726ed7e-d61a-4a2c-9e05-59cbaa4f1bf0","oil-055a850c7fce9512","oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-23d97461886d2622","oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-438415c185832786","oil-4b88eb2520f8cc22","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-7269f661e72c703f","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","oil-c1a2f95596a3b00d","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f1693a0670f7b784","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-fc714f38909e4348"],"ontology_types":["edible_oil","fflo:EdibleOil","fkg:EdibleOil","fkg:Food"],"aliases":["Fortune Refined Soybean Oil","halo refined soyabean oil","refined soyabean oil","refined soybean oil","siddha baba refined soyabean oil","soyabean oil","soybean oil"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:oil:coconut-oil","name":"Coconut oil","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 2 extracted labels.","occurrences":17,"article_count":17,"event_count":17,"article_ids":["oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-8e1ede70f7533502","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-9c21da748413e6f9","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","oil-a882a3e8b7aeb487","oil-a9685f88d15906f6","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-bd1df718191f8f6e","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-fc5474312cf8529f","oil-ff34df409a4806f1"],"ontology_types":["fflo:EdibleOil","fkg:Food"],"aliases":["coconut oil","surya coconut oil"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:oil:cooking-oil","name":"Cooking oil","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 3 extracted labels.","occurrences":16,"article_count":16,"event_count":16,"article_ids":["eec20343-5ffa-486c-b431-59ca5e4568d4","oil-0d7b13a282f9b466","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-63426d939d718e7f","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-c0e8fd0149fa83c4","oil-c94e003c369b3450","oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-e72f16ac2686175c","oil-f1693a0670f7b784","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8"],"ontology_types":["fflo:EdibleOil","fkg:EdibleOil","fkg:Food","fso:EdibleOil"],"aliases":["cooking oil","used cooking oil","vegetable cooking oil"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:oil:palm-oil","name":"Palm oil","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 2 extracted labels.","occurrences":13,"article_count":13,"event_count":13,"article_ids":["4726ed7e-d61a-4a2c-9e05-59cbaa4f1bf0","eec20343-5ffa-486c-b431-59ca5e4568d4","oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-438415c185832786","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-a0831d014f72baf3","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant","fflo:NaturalAdulterant","fkg:EdibleOil","fkg:Food","fkg:Ingredient","fso:EdibleOil"],"aliases":["palm oil","refined palm oil"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:oil:groundnut-or-peanut-oil","name":"Groundnut or peanut oil","definition":"Oil produced from groundnut or peanut; both names are treated as one product category.","occurrences":9,"article_count":9,"event_count":9,"article_ids":["oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3"],"ontology_types":["fflo:EdibleOil","fkg:EdibleOil","fkg:Food"],"aliases":["groundnut oil","peanut oil"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:oil:sunflower-oil","name":"Sunflower oil","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 3 extracted labels.","occurrences":8,"article_count":8,"event_count":8,"article_ids":["15f9d255-f348-4fb7-ba3d-003ab6adcfb2","oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8"],"ontology_types":["fflo:EdibleOil","fflo:Food","fkg:Food"],"aliases":["halo refined sunflower oil","refined sunflower oil","sunflower oil"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:oil:palm-olein","name":"Palm olein","definition":"The liquid fraction of palm oil, including spelling variants such as palmolein.","occurrences":5,"article_count":4,"event_count":5,"article_ids":["e6d36e44-00e2-4f9e-95b1-e892e44117eb","oil-4b88eb2520f8cc22","oil-7ed3f9582cae741d","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8"],"ontology_types":["edible_oil","fflo:EdibleOil","fflo:NaturalAdulterant","fkg:Food"],"aliases":["palm olein oil","palmolein oil"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:oil:rice-bran-oil","name":"Rice bran oil","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":3,"article_count":3,"event_count":3,"article_ids":["oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-fc714f38909e4348"],"ontology_types":["fkg:EdibleOil","fkg:Food"],"aliases":["rice bran oil"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:oil:vanaspati","name":"Vanaspati","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":3,"article_count":3,"event_count":3,"article_ids":["46441742-607f-484f-80fe-b1334048144a","4726ed7e-d61a-4a2c-9e05-59cbaa4f1bf0","oil-c3728ff063420cf8"],"ontology_types":["edible_oil","fkg:Food"],"aliases":["vanaspati"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:oil:blended-or-multi-source-edible-oil","name":"Blended or multi-source edible oil","definition":"An edible-oil product represented as a blend of oils or sources.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["oil-42c4efcdce45e35d","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559"],"ontology_types":["fkg:Food"],"aliases":["blended cooking oil","Mast Health Multi-source Edible Oil"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:oil:branded-edible-oil","name":"Branded edible oil","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-c84820229ce8af05"],"ontology_types":["fkg:Food"],"aliases":["Fresh Heart brand oil"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:oil:refined-edible-oil","name":"Refined edible oil","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 2 extracted labels.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299"],"ontology_types":["fkg:Food"],"aliases":["Binni refined oil","refined oil"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:oil:almond-oil","name":"Almond oil","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-5413f17944743156"],"ontology_types":["fflo:EdibleOil"],"aliases":["almond oil"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:oil:condensate-oil","name":"Condensate oil","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-9790eee6e00c0018"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["condensate oil"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:oil:cottonseed-oil","name":"Cottonseed oil","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-86a403aef71f924e"],"ontology_types":["fflo:EdibleOil"],"aliases":["cottonseed oil"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:oil:kalonji-oil","name":"Kalonji oil","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-5413f17944743156"],"ontology_types":["fflo:EdibleOil"],"aliases":["kalonji oil"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:oil:safflower-oil","name":"Safflower oil","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-077084a32a4e8faa"],"ontology_types":["fkg:Food"],"aliases":["safflower oil"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:oil:walnut-oil","name":"Walnut oil","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-5413f17944743156"],"ontology_types":["fflo:EdibleOil"],"aliases":["walnut oil"]}]},{"id":"food_products:group:other-foods","name":"Other foods","definition":"Additional foods preserved from multi-food event extraction.","occurrences":26,"article_count":26,"event_count":26,"article_ids":["03ea9124-befd-4983-bcdc-147e3ed3bf73","0932679a-fe82-4a1e-949e-9d4fd17ed2a0","18f4411e-1d84-42c5-835a-97436ad30c7c","23ff1efe-782a-4174-8f33-41a3ff0e8c44","32bc8e29-1313-4d9b-86ff-8c3bb665f057","3401730f-3850-4c7d-884f-dcdb1d086c42","3865528e-cbb8-4615-af7d-f9ab01e9fe4d","3e2829b3-2380-49cb-a370-77a313e8eaa1","53f8ec9a-900f-481f-bfb5-a6ca452416ed","54637d34-f16e-4e98-84c1-681a0fca559c","6ab671c9-310c-4d88-bd88-0251180b2345","706246bb-b5c8-4d73-81fa-2e93d040c762","706f0136-7ae5-45f2-b804-e3a8c9a14d1c","79f059b8-00b2-4345-ad46-440c7bc371df","8205ac1a-be22-438c-b3e0-f7aa463d3501","867c2a12-155a-4309-aff0-300c6125824c","8ecfae6d-fb77-4dfe-9f9b-f1425d8a13da","8ef8782e-cc91-4ddc-95d5-d260f1b7a518","9368fe71-a18d-4580-8063-8e3f17e6cec9","b4a8aa1a-7262-4318-9579-9fff20f959a6","c6e6e3f3-bc85-48dc-ad18-bb08d31d7308","ea27969f-7a0b-4e5c-9893-7763d5fdbfbf","fc91133d-e4b6-4458-8d6c-cb1af7bcd97e","oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-992710122346e1a9"],"entries":[{"id":"food_products:entry:other-foods:laddu","name":"Laddu","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":4,"article_count":4,"event_count":4,"article_ids":["0932679a-fe82-4a1e-949e-9d4fd17ed2a0","18f4411e-1d84-42c5-835a-97436ad30c7c","32bc8e29-1313-4d9b-86ff-8c3bb665f057","53f8ec9a-900f-481f-bfb5-a6ca452416ed"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Food","fkg:Food"],"aliases":["laddu"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:other-foods:laddu-prasadam","name":"Laddu prasadam","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":3,"article_count":3,"event_count":3,"article_ids":["3865528e-cbb8-4615-af7d-f9ab01e9fe4d","c6e6e3f3-bc85-48dc-ad18-bb08d31d7308","fc91133d-e4b6-4458-8d6c-cb1af7bcd97e"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Food","fkg:Food"],"aliases":["laddu prasadam"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:other-foods:srivari-laddu-prasadam","name":"Srivari laddu prasadam","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["6ab671c9-310c-4d88-bd88-0251180b2345","8ef8782e-cc91-4ddc-95d5-d260f1b7a518"],"ontology_types":["fkg:Food"],"aliases":["Srivari laddu prasadam"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:other-foods:butter","name":"Butter","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["23ff1efe-782a-4174-8f33-41a3ff0e8c44"],"ontology_types":["fkg:Food"],"aliases":["butter"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:other-foods:cream","name":"Cream","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["b4a8aa1a-7262-4318-9579-9fff20f959a6"],"ontology_types":["fkg:Food"],"aliases":["cream"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:other-foods:flour","name":"Flour","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-028241dff8c29c89"],"ontology_types":["fkg:Food"],"aliases":["flour"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:other-foods:halwa","name":"Halwa","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["706f0136-7ae5-45f2-b804-e3a8c9a14d1c"],"ontology_types":["fkg:Food"],"aliases":["halwa"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:other-foods:khoya","name":"Khoya","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["79f059b8-00b2-4345-ad46-440c7bc371df"],"ontology_types":["fkg:Food"],"aliases":["khoya"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:other-foods:laddu-prasadams","name":"Laddu prasadams","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["03ea9124-befd-4983-bcdc-147e3ed3bf73"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Food"],"aliases":["laddu prasadams"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:other-foods:prasad","name":"Prasad","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["3401730f-3850-4c7d-884f-dcdb1d086c42"],"ontology_types":["fkg:Food"],"aliases":["prasad"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:other-foods:refined-palm-olein","name":"Refined palm olein","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-992710122346e1a9"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["refined palm olein"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:other-foods:shrikhand","name":"Shrikhand","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-829d382c68663635"],"ontology_types":["fkg:Food"],"aliases":["shrikhand"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:other-foods:sweets","name":"Sweets","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["9368fe71-a18d-4580-8063-8e3f17e6cec9"],"ontology_types":["fkg:Confectionery"],"aliases":["sweets"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:other-foods:tirumala-laddoo","name":"Tirumala laddoo","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["8205ac1a-be22-438c-b3e0-f7aa463d3501"],"ontology_types":["fkg:Food"],"aliases":["Tirumala Laddoo"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:other-foods:tirumala-laddu","name":"Tirumala laddu","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["54637d34-f16e-4e98-84c1-681a0fca559c"],"ontology_types":["fkg:Food"],"aliases":["Tirumala laddu"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:other-foods:tirumala-laddu-prasadam","name":"Tirumala laddu prasadam","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["3e2829b3-2380-49cb-a370-77a313e8eaa1"],"ontology_types":["fkg:Food"],"aliases":["Tirumala Laddu Prasadam"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:other-foods:tirumala-srivari-laddu","name":"Tirumala srivari laddu","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["ea27969f-7a0b-4e5c-9893-7763d5fdbfbf"],"ontology_types":["fkg:Food"],"aliases":["Tirumala Srivari laddu"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:other-foods:tirumala-srivari-laddu-prasadam","name":"Tirumala srivari laddu prasadam","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["867c2a12-155a-4309-aff0-300c6125824c"],"ontology_types":["fkg:Food"],"aliases":["Tirumala Srivari Laddu Prasadam"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:other-foods:tirupati-laddu","name":"Tirupati laddu","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["8ecfae6d-fb77-4dfe-9f9b-f1425d8a13da"],"ontology_types":["fkg:Food"],"aliases":["Tirupati Laddu"]},{"id":"food_products:entry:other-foods:tirupati-prasadam-laddu","name":"Tirupati prasadam laddu","definition":"A normalized food products concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["706246bb-b5c8-4d73-81fa-2e93d040c762"],"ontology_types":["fkg:Food"],"aliases":["Tirupati Prasadam laddu"]}]}]},{"id":"issue_types","label":"Issue types","description":"Food-safety and fraud issue categories assigned to event objects.","groups":[{"id":"issue_types:group:food-fraud-and-authenticity","name":"Food fraud and authenticity","definition":"Issues concerning product identity, composition, substitution, dilution, or fraudulent presentation.","occurrences":712,"article_count":514,"event_count":562,"article_ids":["008cc0e4-d7d7-475f-80d8-d81621e7b862","0109eea0-3adc-4177-a6f7-e3bc31bf237d","030df41e-ccfc-4023-a026-89cc92bf3253","03ea9124-befd-4983-bcdc-147e3ed3bf73","04c00967-a247-4802-b3c2-3f266885c385","05375704-5b45-4e0a-b388-9944c0c5fc9f","05937ca4-de64-422f-ba56-878f6152027c","0932679a-fe82-4a1e-949e-9d4fd17ed2a0","0a113e2a-26d3-45e4-9064-7cfa2f39230b","0a23e582-3dac-4091-bf36-a08d511a3763","0a342064-5378-4aff-b4aa-34ae5c1ab66b","0aa842b8-1ac9-4243-a8b6-5d98d32d6089","0af3703f-23ec-4f8f-a1b6-45b4adb68b12","0b5a50e0-df3b-42ea-83c6-80bc16cf39fb","0d14295d-a954-4163-8974-ecb51bd464e8","0e464dfa-d504-4806-9005-c1ba38758bf8","0e518ac8-dc53-4c79-938a-bd26c1142eeb","0ea7c6a7-d2c1-498f-aa00-f3fc942206ed","0ef4d3e4-844c-47ee-a430-8f171ec4c000","0f7493be-b335-4851-9029-9e87ba0da155","0facca96-d90c-4f21-ba98-356f7f6b1622","102a4953-33a2-4842-827e-987e3bb6ce7a","10f36230-190b-4b13-8cfc-8d12c2f37080","141518ef-ce68-4969-bb2a-66f56733fab2","15f9d255-f348-4fb7-ba3d-003ab6adcfb2","164f43df-a069-4197-9854-e7bd9fc78fae","178d6244-50cd-4bea-8e16-f951f6227a8c","18f4411e-1d84-42c5-835a-97436ad30c7c","1931e9b4-edf1-42ec-a9c4-00ff0cbcff9a","1933f8f5-8812-4e24-85bd-cdbdc83f929e","194f3e22-f4b6-483b-9333-762c3a3b6b9d","1a066d87-0093-4ca8-9c10-84c004b76c48","1a806023-ac1d-4da2-924e-25821c2554f5","1a87f314-ec7e-4407-96f2-0995e8d26fc0","1addfba0-b7e9-4722-85be-a642cdf63571","1ae756d4-675e-4a08-bc7d-ba6a3e922d5d","1b1069d2-3f50-4dd3-a8bd-0aeed6bacf98","1b74e29d-f583-4ee4-96bc-e93553c915b3","1bb0d3e5-6f04-4d91-a899-8b6f59bc228a","1c7ea343-020a-4266-9854-b12ebfa2cf50","1c8fe57c-2cee-4f73-a5f3-6ee4051024e7","1de4a13b-1497-421e-b5bc-a8ebbc7a3b18","1de65c17-36dd-4ba6-ada6-bcd98b556aad","1df33743-1016-49ce-981b-862125c0893f","1e6b9f5b-a065-4242-ae58-1f105455955f","1fe9639d-5c39-472e-94a7-73ac2b03bfce","2010c6e2-c9cb-4a3e-b22b-8cabf1044074","2013c452-d1c8-41a0-abea-92e26d231790","21fb2b00-9b86-4924-9a0d-248f976cfd93","22261df7-8974-447f-a1cf-192c59528f64","2255e304-d6ef-4707-b594-cbc3955019ec","229a7f40-f956-476e-8c84-3fd9ed3d6c29","22bf4101-c33b-4711-b6e3-379968f7c217","23a5dd2a-a53c-44b8-8b86-37e04d4cf1ee","23ff1efe-782a-4174-8f33-41a3ff0e8c44","2499d49c-748f-41d8-84d9-eed7a66ad43a","255ac21d-c17e-4926-9dad-13db7698ed72","2679a7a3-abde-4979-ac6e-5cf24113e0db","268e5866-7aea-4546-934f-f105a70b1096","26ac5726-fd69-42b8-a80e-6a71b91ba466","26b11917-4e55-41d5-aeb1-64e8b44bedba","2719a94d-d523-4fef-bfd9-a1bef16dd951","28a03096-e60c-4adb-b4fa-55f0bd28a95d","292b562c-132b-47cc-9030-d2544e801e7e","29a173b3-4587-4257-9c93-2f0c483079c5","2a59f77c-89ba-49fe-be6c-b3c9756a9940","2ad1f047-985c-4c59-aa13-749fa75bcba9","2b442757-da6a-46e5-ae37-b083e00062d3","2c075e82-3fe3-4b95-a68a-f0fad41e51f5","2d8a95d1-8554-4194-b427-4239c3f9ad5b","2f23ec7d-e712-46f5-ae1c-5e7634725242","2fc5c9f1-64d2-498f-8f7a-96d94b926f6d","2fe1bef6-e797-4d9f-bb5b-6f936d7a55dc","2fede3c0-46a7-46e8-a776-5a6fd6d3f08e","301bb818-ff44-4346-9ffe-ad58bf13cfb2","31cae76c-aa62-4328-bd40-368275f60e9f","31f1f824-c698-4b97-a52a-1a1136a9ac6e","3278338f-1fa0-4045-9701-e237d5ad0930","3282adec-c328-4317-a091-a126587d78de","32bc8e29-1313-4d9b-86ff-8c3bb665f057","33326887-4ed0-4562-a0ac-b889d6ad53a9","336a89c4-d98a-4242-8803-4d479689bc4d","3401730f-3850-4c7d-884f-dcdb1d086c42","34b8b88f-e283-46cd-ba6e-f373dc3d4395","34dc1c1f-d12c-4230-bb1c-e41b6961f288","3624ed70-d464-4caa-9b4e-4dfc2ed435dc","368930a7-2085-43bd-bb79-62d471c9e75c","36a70fc6-de5a-494c-9dc5-801fe7a7a53d","3797cfc4-05a5-422b-b823-ed3bb850f540","3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","3865528e-cbb8-4615-af7d-f9ab01e9fe4d","38d24327-d93d-472b-99ac-246351c7dbfd","3911de79-cbfd-4eaa-9311-207b452faa93","394a5ff5-76f3-4885-87ed-4a6879611c22","39a9fb26-817d-404e-a150-4e4c5ebc037c","39e61860-2a60-448c-838e-a7f01e4d0c5c","3c0e9d23-f858-47eb-8e7a-23db1d42822a","3cdd0ffb-841b-4883-9b1a-df7b28022554","3d6b98eb-c79e-460c-883b-9c997ffea009","3e2829b3-2380-49cb-a370-77a313e8eaa1","3e325b99-7611-4f89-8963-7f79c5ac4105","3f674523-5416-4b89-8cab-fe3ddf3c9e7e","411b1d1a-7b18-4425-90f0-da2c296625eb","4216dab3-b436-422a-a6ee-74b5858f7aa2","4260e03f-c3cd-480c-827c-7ebe3a09e913","4299b01d-c5ab-4283-ae2d-31aa1fdbbfec","432f2c6e-3092-44cd-bf1b-54249b31ad6b","438c4f31-19bd-4ff3-bed4-035569ec6cbf","43de8661-2844-46b7-bb39-15eb17f6b82e","43e20f96-27cb-4f67-b7e5-6228aea8e7b6","445ff19b-5429-4a55-be3f-c4b03481b04f","4469e268-1b01-49b7-a436-ea4a88ba6269","451d9824-7933-403d-beaa-1ac6398509c9","45fdd40d-5bc4-4fe7-9eb9-883c55f14a70","46441742-607f-484f-80fe-b1334048144a","4661fe17-e88d-41ab-a8c6-9aefcbbaed5c","471bc3da-bbd4-417c-875a-595a713be7fd","4726ed7e-d61a-4a2c-9e05-59cbaa4f1bf0","473ed916-1979-4222-b1e8-38d39c51fe03","47635cd8-696c-4adf-94ed-338f084a3d62","484a6113-0a95-4624-8291-c00710260e4d","4974f73f-37bc-4300-8d31-d97ca337365b","4a021f95-539e-4217-98a0-d651be9a3b47","4a638904-2bcf-4037-8afd-ec6e5b0b6b11","4c67d899-fab5-4e78-9274-526d6a4fe0bb","4cd73621-691c-4866-91c1-0b99d0d1a89a","4d6ab7d0-4e16-4d1b-aa49-7f453c9352b6","4d7063c6-5201-4ce1-89ed-75ee21d51b98","4eb18b90-e310-48db-9531-68b146420749","4f3026f8-7217-4bf9-af6e-71bcad8bb1c5","4fa075c9-a30f-47e5-8f09-158017bfd6d6","502ff9a1-ac00-4ef2-96cb-0a0614085766","504dd102-6089-4fcb-a066-0006720862a7","5118358f-2777-4bfd-a761-adb4bc1da763","51a534c1-9193-4b8c-bbd2-b4e368930ead","5245dc0a-5d68-4a00-ad89-6255f3bee930","526515f5-4a82-4b0b-9e1c-7f3a2aa4cde4","52bd3a8a-1c92-484d-8be6-5f7e4a7274e1","534ab39c-32c3-46ea-a742-5095170a0003","5374dadc-cd7f-41df-b8d9-8ef7c10ec693","53f8ec9a-900f-481f-bfb5-a6ca452416ed","5406e730-2d78-47b4-ba27-fc933e691eab","54637d34-f16e-4e98-84c1-681a0fca559c","54686005-b842-4cc5-82b1-0276e36a42b6","550bda80-b5be-488a-89f6-64b9698b4033","554708da-6872-4a1b-91cc-3beeb59fbf2e","55552c00-e696-4ac2-951e-156364cb1337","5710a503-9fbe-46ae-abd5-2663069b70db","57b2326c-e877-4995-82fc-221eda139718","5804b97c-c416-49d1-9fbd-5bb52c0595dd","58163259-bc87-4025-a6cc-f3a0848b52cf","58ac029e-4204-42c4-8ff3-6dbd84dd382a","58c8e8bf-9cbd-46dd-8a8b-b1b5cbb0d58d","590fff58-7ba9-4a5b-8232-4c27d67f13b1","5a7bde0b-59e0-4f86-9b63-2bbebb593d41","5c86116b-5fae-45a9-b467-01fc8b26a166","5d222c9b-8733-4d3b-abaa-59f77da35546","5f6c5fd0-a2f8-4bfe-9ac4-a8d06bc8640a","5fa4530c-d60b-48c1-b6b2-371abff6d77a","60ccacb1-7c41-4259-b651-bfbf60e7b53a","6135126e-45b3-4fe7-a80f-82248b08ea7b","61a00782-20f7-4170-b4e2-d9d9157b3a3c","620bfde0-ec72-4b52-bfa4-e06ce3b56960","62bc0e3c-1d90-4688-bc1b-e00f620c5c8c","634a0a0f-0899-427f-9396-6cc3c5442643","6411a3a1-2932-41eb-b497-f9a2400de74c","64902247-dbff-448d-987f-c89ac2e30538","66bb816a-1961-4e45-8460-9328304c7956","6721b632-2b4f-492a-840d-bb05d2a9f1af","672ecfdb-cb9d-485d-8fc1-76e6a8269fe7","67c4a0dd-5f32-4dde-b733-4a4a9e5dfafb","68753b50-8fe7-4499-bb2d-ddfcc7e16c94","6901ef7b-f98a-4b3a-b622-85196fe10ffb","696bb9a6-aa69-4de4-a566-5df21482bc51","6a44ea24-a3bf-4ad8-96b1-5ae56cefb84c","6ab671c9-310c-4d88-bd88-0251180b2345","6cf864fb-5956-4416-a1c5-f42153e66ec4","6ee56cf3-78f2-4420-bede-08f76397b2fb","6f00035b-1437-428d-895c-a234866e29e0","6f4adcf4-c63b-41c9-b7f6-0b0f4e75c857","706246bb-b5c8-4d73-81fa-2e93d040c762","706f0136-7ae5-45f2-b804-e3a8c9a14d1c","70b9c7ef-3983-40dd-b904-5607537ff37f","71196507-ad87-406f-a4df-edc8a14b1575","73066633-67a8-4240-8c5a-3c4ae29b486d","73369c4a-c44b-4b7a-b3cc-07766ccb4e2a","73e97a89-5b5f-4104-bc6a-50b8f564040a","747400a0-bfad-4fa2-8004-06f237d1c543","75eac450-5d76-45da-975a-a47f1515ca01","75f7eb04-35fe-48ce-af4a-d0ccf3067076","77ed2567-2595-48f0-891b-a753164f2866","7855cb39-b177-4d3b-bd72-0a18afd5415b","79cfeedd-0cef-4026-962d-c86d241c4e56","79f059b8-00b2-4345-ad46-440c7bc371df","7a539249-77a2-4e2b-a29f-6952304d80d7","7a59b547-cf09-4b46-bbfe-d7a7f34b7cfc","7a707681-5edc-461c-b5a8-0057a374f3cc","7b3b345d-0902-4461-a6bc-747c26feb7f2","7c914cb3-8ba1-4768-ac56-a051b75a6e8b","7ddc7283-670a-4dfb-9e38-a11aa0c579c2","8151434e-f600-47a9-93df-16b483e88961","815dcb75-691c-4066-a898-b7ed46fdbdf2","816a43e1-6b33-4a27-a385-9d12dd8e924f","8187d86e-f46c-4e26-8188-a4e7b31de2f6","81b21166-1d16-4aec-910f-b382f9680f5f","81f9e1b1-71fd-45a2-9292-017420336059","8205ac1a-be22-438c-b3e0-f7aa463d3501","824601ea-5309-4ddf-bc61-486c992e309c","835cbabf-d424-4f04-89cb-1d8c0b08f1ab","83bf777b-6ee5-4e82-bd85-6e374853473a","84512e93-e51a-4c89-88dd-ecc2afc0699a","84a895b3-81ad-42e9-b54d-614c66aca856","84ea460e-bfc2-4977-aebb-32594a90693b","85680853-3899-4f21-b262-dbe3e8893779","8577ca11-d1ef-4517-846f-747a51b46f07","867c2a12-155a-4309-aff0-300c6125824c","86b559ac-3645-468b-9f43-7d961bd255d7","8779026e-22f2-4276-a7b9-695e4e569057","892c7a97-bb6b-47a5-9402-8a5293acf25b","897c7de9-ed19-4ee2-a2d5-85b75355519d","89e1831f-7c8d-46ad-b545-7b0e141b1fa7","8aaa4093-987c-4a1d-8fbd-8e1d1e495fe3","8b1ef2e6-f7a2-4db0-9589-42159cf06574","8d8b9ba9-5da4-4861-89db-348400c8ef68","8e0f3d53-2c44-474d-9787-4713b7050c28","8e4f2f4a-8039-4ba0-9b6d-beecad106136","8eb102f2-a097-496b-8975-3d2cd6e31a8d","8ecfae6d-fb77-4dfe-9f9b-f1425d8a13da","8ef8782e-cc91-4ddc-95d5-d260f1b7a518","905b10d3-5531-40bc-b5e3-84beb79f1af2","91aa9ca8-e7d7-4036-a22f-5c8c8e7fc2ce","920f5e05-04f9-4545-b26d-ea48a1f18a2f","9285d418-e4e3-40a1-b1d1-da857748bfd3","92b301e8-97fb-47a7-94a6-b858beb0a1fb","9368fe71-a18d-4580-8063-8e3f17e6cec9","9379cea2-647c-459b-af54-770e31e9bbe1","93c87fee-61ec-4ea8-bd4f-3434669835ee","93ec7040-a06c-4da5-b0b1-626399456a8a","944709d1-19c5-461e-a509-d35f5314cc8e","946d9238-09b9-474e-8481-5e734cedca7a","948eda84-20a8-442d-8a0a-ffba051904a4","94d114b9-3c47-468e-8714-ed449f90e8e4","94faca18-b471-4748-8bab-f399641cedbd","95044e07-ad37-43f6-95b0-cebe1e9f8ce0","95b8351c-9ddb-457d-9035-ad3b6d181dc7","96621df7-0c9b-41e5-a5a6-3f21a24613d5","96adc5c1-5a68-473e-9d38-85bed792c8fc","97c9d44f-1ca4-489d-a786-dc23f1fe1175","980db746-8492-4784-ab7e-f6c3b10378e1","9849e210-d94b-448b-885e-7bdffe11cfe9","9bd6a50e-945d-42d4-88de-97e83b4c3b06","9c74f902-2ef0-4269-b436-acc19aa11ea5","9c81b00b-87e1-4cce-bfc8-9583b3b8a234","9cbf8104-4fa2-4365-bc32-09eb2d1c9381","9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","9d92713b-a9c4-4b7e-87f4-c4fd443e38b5","9f454843-a34c-4619-a576-493f835993b4","9fe3b91d-3719-4260-926a-d5711bd1efc4","a06cd968-9dc5-42c5-a6e8-3d3c36dfc8c2","a18ba308-f8ab-4590-b466-daf80aa2b59c","a3aeeb23-ea47-454e-9079-05e2142e157d","a3ce7cd2-ee71-42ce-b4f7-96a81c6bd295","a45c3495-d077-4241-b1d7-72fa109d0e6b","a6385d09-ca9d-4f95-b5ba-4f50630bec35","a7002128-c4bc-48cd-bed1-46a529e69132","a7cc57e8-71f7-4536-ba7c-452e09344a18","a96905fe-9d68-4a0c-9c4e-ce250411fcd9","a9c15856-f188-45d4-80a8-7929118af59a","aa57f0d8-8cb4-4c4c-8ef4-4c4acdef25e4","ab7d0ab2-d774-415c-bd3f-a606f92ef3c3","abb94f1c-6bf3-442d-9749-eacc170b025c","ac5e071a-48a2-4a53-a1f6-5fc7b6d35280","adad636e-6844-49cb-bb07-54ff4f1a044f","add15855-56e0-4264-819c-b8e8110846aa","adfa4015-b34e-4488-99e4-b20b4dc10324","aec84261-126b-4386-b0f4-15f160ca67ae","aed9cf49-b6d3-4952-8acb-37e1eae1c31a","b26721cc-ba4b-460e-a726-17bebda4c82e","b293dea5-f7e1-4889-a56d-f823569cdff4","b3b632d3-bab8-43e4-9749-51b79e59f7dd","b3e58970-8bf0-4e37-a8f9-dd4fce60bf46","b40ee428-0e50-4a51-aca9-a9074c0486cf","b4a8aa1a-7262-4318-9579-9fff20f959a6","b4b614f7-a43d-4e57-9766-25f7fef90d68","b556af30-b2db-4273-8b3b-a5b1ec113ebb","b55fc156-b5e6-49b6-b4f1-e092d3b4f553","b5940660-7f58-4123-bb25-6f78d4e1694d","b6a4c3c9-311e-4a4f-beaf-d0012bbfbf51","b77861f3-9e86-4450-a13f-4522abb6a8ef","b78601e1-6600-408f-bc8c-52407a676ecb","b8eebc63-ef4e-4144-9327-420f594806c6","bc813ec4-3453-4fe2-a5d0-884fdb51bfc7","bcd183c8-344e-4cb8-8561-8c2e6a027897","bcd80071-6449-4036-accf-62939d2bc771","bdc8358e-29a2-4efa-a99e-6023a27df35b","bf5cf44c-c3df-4c9c-b13b-8a0108b8a106","c0981bc0-6d81-46d5-a2fc-715c6a5662b8","c2853c18-cc20-43b6-bd36-3b77725ba1d7","c2875090-e4c1-4cec-be8a-7218c8774f6b","c349f006-e1f4-498e-970a-626a724e2231","c3aa82e4-0707-4514-a535-22d6d4a7f0b2","c51ad2dc-5440-4692-bdac-73968c6ad4d2","c5597192-fe4a-479a-8bf7-cdcf15d74d10","c66f7c07-f922-4abd-8805-71a0fade560f","c6b3635d-7479-4594-9803-195c9d36f4a1","c6dcef79-69bf-47eb-a0b5-7b4d6bef00fc","c6e1c64f-1094-4a24-9d3e-8103fb4d94ab","c6e6e3f3-bc85-48dc-ad18-bb08d31d7308","c7589046-9f75-46b4-bd78-c3fe0703df52","c7803b74-2f5d-47d0-a09e-c27ed98ec1a3","c7af7c66-9a6d-42c8-8695-bcd164ed856b","c8ddee14-df38-49aa-9d85-a7c6b34273a6","c999d71f-777d-4d80-9f37-37391f97acd4","caae3943-065a-475a-a6fe-f5706ce3db97","cb333cad-a0a7-4971-8f06-e4ca49e58c39","cbdf7850-c12b-44e7-9a2a-2e88994f389f","cd235f2c-1119-4002-b756-61e2983b0232","cddf4a6a-4d4e-4d8b-9631-734b807f7215","ce0c52be-896a-479c-b92b-09bf3518d332","cf1f664f-fab8-46ef-9768-c3fc897d3913","cf35dad3-c846-4c5e-91db-577efd256f78","cfa001c3-f0fc-45cd-8a71-3e35d2026e1f","cfd3be60-c380-4a63-8e12-5fd8af9b72bd","d11fa038-1162-4d93-9df5-6d5b35b8628b","d156577c-5001-4f1b-90f7-d7b21a37497b","d18985ea-8239-498e-9147-eda1d0bb8bde","d20d6d55-e1d9-462f-902a-31987fc17f06","d2c92cf6-2a73-4e89-adff-db3cb523f8e1","d301dc8a-7194-46ad-bf04-43efdc78c053","d315d00d-a3eb-4c0f-9554-c1395585910f","d3bd5582-331f-4b89-96d8-d988dabaecd2","d3c6617c-2925-40b2-aa72-9b0b6c5e83d4","d405b9b8-3fd3-4230-a3d3-ccdd34abd185","d5ff3294-0ecd-48eb-b9dd-a2c0282a055a","d6f9dd1e-cee9-48ff-a7e7-71d7a7b8f61d","d7c49d74-0c9c-470b-94ad-c7ccaa111eaf","d7f7d93d-fda2-48cd-89a3-7b5c35ec6480","d8ab6193-0742-4b7e-99ea-f1131b5fc36f","d96f8ae8-4753-4f7b-9ec5-3238eca05841","d9794536-257f-4a12-8d46-a7c0c649fb97","dab486f0-dfe1-46a8-b0d8-32e2a200b8e8","db8eb9e3-f6e6-4be4-b6d2-d135a6c3e9ac","dc0f107c-d6af-40f2-b8fd-d6a8264071a5","dc9b6179-78d1-4eec-9df7-47aadc6c4002","dd99547d-81d1-4764-ba78-52a1cddf906d","ddada193-97b9-4ccc-8a51-bfbea77a0c06","e06bafea-36a4-40ac-8e47-2a2619fd46fd","e1083f09-5ed1-4bdf-8ac5-3c65482b8e5f","e1955bc5-123d-4ca0-b875-2d75b1f718f1","e1bbca7c-14db-40cf-a128-0219f12466a3","e256486b-ee32-4d0f-9cba-d02bf4bd780a","e27aa94c-fa47-4a58-bc17-1e5d3387b739","e2a4561f-b8bf-4ca9-9990-3b885eaf5c2b","e2f38cc3-06ff-4db2-8aad-a537c1e1d0c8","e446ef0a-2a74-42bf-bcd6-2b793506650e","e4aba04c-81ff-438c-a506-881ff2436c82","e500f58c-3afd-4143-b4d2-f60500bf9023","e53f3cca-ca53-449c-9f09-737f317fb169","e57d61a5-e3ec-423d-ad96-243fbfae502b","e6d36e44-00e2-4f9e-95b1-e892e44117eb","e6e7e00b-0ede-4741-8419-066a93e431cd","e6f33250-4650-42ce-96e8-87ce7eebc853","e70df749-9305-44b3-8a30-defc332a7fa4","e7a8eb39-66a7-4777-a0d6-cfb00f8f0798","e8fbbd18-0c64-4437-9ea9-4b4877081943","e9029bad-f0af-4178-8545-61b8bf20d98f","ea0bba2c-7a56-40f2-afac-00f638b54fc3","ea27969f-7a0b-4e5c-9893-7763d5fdbfbf","ea51c75b-4b85-48fb-bbb7-8fde23c110aa","ea6c8861-7a39-4e19-8e71-58720131fa8d","eac2c9bd-6ddc-48dc-92e0-405c318acfb0","eb7f5240-b11f-4c58-9681-91c05d2c3f50","eb84cbb3-24d1-4565-9ec1-8bd3b9d4bec9","ec990258-7999-4c93-81af-59b6ab2c65df","ed2c35d4-102a-4b73-8382-2ac35610faed","edf6b48c-90dc-4757-814e-999556997808","eec20343-5ffa-486c-b431-59ca5e4568d4","ef391115-fde1-44aa-ab00-abb8e2e7ec82","efb7c5ac-4ac5-4964-80cb-f95ebaa0e04c","f0a80593-3eca-497d-afa0-90d16a414e1d","f121b53e-c2bd-4ce5-878c-fd5a64863273","f1307eae-cbfb-4f04-b6cc-3facd9e296d6","f19a484a-77bd-4389-8266-523228328091","f1ba13f7-7414-47ce-9df3-a6aa0902c1b9","f1f602c9-64cd-4bfc-855c-fb8060a9c483","f24f8cd0-0ca1-49cf-8cf1-4a5e6b938fe3","f25f2d19-18b4-4e7e-ad7b-8f30a193b3d6","f267ac1f-eff8-417a-8920-f8d37e384f79","f289c668-0c40-41e6-82af-ae6829b262d4","f319102d-533a-41ff-9f08-6bda6778bb7e","f40851bc-e6e8-4605-ba83-f44d932b4760","f4c53608-9890-4b9f-89a3-7c1028bc1e05","f502d85e-d523-4b8c-9dec-469aa08204df","f5653eaf-7d13-4c91-93c7-e30daca2ec3a","f5876a8c-263e-4134-a5b2-ba2453ed9080","f58af8d2-a271-4586-b2b4-1b399c9f84de","f5c77efa-f72b-424c-a810-81cd552ba3de","f62defd3-7975-4edf-8f34-40a36b487ac8","f6e3366d-13bc-4a60-94b6-f77a2c2032c0","f75dd4aa-d0bc-4078-857d-76a41f9df08f","f9720bd0-18fb-4774-96e6-eca25490f73e","fa1e38b4-4ced-4f4b-9a7b-b1b89ff13da7","fa93085f-260f-4f91-af1c-c85c03ca06fa","fb4d21e7-be93-4775-905f-977427db28c4","fc91133d-e4b6-4458-8d6c-cb1af7bcd97e","fdc662ec-5ed7-4d04-8993-6144ff01abc2","fe4e9bc0-2802-4dd8-97e4-27704fad2a1b","fec4e8d2-6a2f-4046-b9d4-85a831f76655","fee252e0-d871-44c1-8917-1fd2d148377a","ff092982-3b6e-4f4c-8194-6b8201ee1246","ff4c3069-118e-4f08-aa39-6394130a8ec4","oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-05aa031a4b58524e","oil-06d5928124689ba0","oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-081117bbf714a215","oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0","oil-0d7b13a282f9b466","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","oil-13fd5c31e278a577","oil-156fd0980ec51fe6","oil-1852e8a212bd5903","oil-1c3f4e35a1252449","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-4b88eb2520f8cc22","oil-4bd4c6831e9c7077","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-5413f17944743156","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-63426d939d718e7f","oil-63f43befc46e25fa","oil-66b89ef48f4536a9","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-7269f661e72c703f","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-7ced813eb9eb1314","oil-7ed3f9582cae741d","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-846611108e27fafb","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-86a403aef71f924e","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-8e1ede70f7533502","oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77","oil-94951aba738c80b3","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-9c21da748413e6f9","oil-9f582ea75e0eddfb","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-a882a3e8b7aeb487","oil-a9685f88d15906f6","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-b434a85e1e9196d0","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","oil-c1a2f95596a3b00d","oil-c2fa50179af284f7","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-ce4031737a7654b3","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-d276b566dce62194","oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","oil-d479413f1e610f85","oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f1693a0670f7b784","oil-f5b6386895404f0b","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-f96a10806285c261","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-fc5474312cf8529f","oil-fc714f38909e4348","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","oil-fcda56b4bb45ffd3","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9","oil-ff34df409a4806f1"],"entries":[{"id":"issue_types:entry:food-fraud-and-authenticity:adulteration","name":"Adulteration","definition":"A substance, process, or product condition is reported as compromising the food.","occurrences":533,"article_count":486,"event_count":533,"article_ids":["008cc0e4-d7d7-475f-80d8-d81621e7b862","0109eea0-3adc-4177-a6f7-e3bc31bf237d","030df41e-ccfc-4023-a026-89cc92bf3253","03ea9124-befd-4983-bcdc-147e3ed3bf73","04c00967-a247-4802-b3c2-3f266885c385","05937ca4-de64-422f-ba56-878f6152027c","0932679a-fe82-4a1e-949e-9d4fd17ed2a0","0a113e2a-26d3-45e4-9064-7cfa2f39230b","0a23e582-3dac-4091-bf36-a08d511a3763","0a342064-5378-4aff-b4aa-34ae5c1ab66b","0aa842b8-1ac9-4243-a8b6-5d98d32d6089","0af3703f-23ec-4f8f-a1b6-45b4adb68b12","0b5a50e0-df3b-42ea-83c6-80bc16cf39fb","0d14295d-a954-4163-8974-ecb51bd464e8","0e464dfa-d504-4806-9005-c1ba38758bf8","0e518ac8-dc53-4c79-938a-bd26c1142eeb","0ea7c6a7-d2c1-498f-aa00-f3fc942206ed","0ef4d3e4-844c-47ee-a430-8f171ec4c000","0f7493be-b335-4851-9029-9e87ba0da155","0facca96-d90c-4f21-ba98-356f7f6b1622","102a4953-33a2-4842-827e-987e3bb6ce7a","141518ef-ce68-4969-bb2a-66f56733fab2","15f9d255-f348-4fb7-ba3d-003ab6adcfb2","164f43df-a069-4197-9854-e7bd9fc78fae","178d6244-50cd-4bea-8e16-f951f6227a8c","18f4411e-1d84-42c5-835a-97436ad30c7c","1931e9b4-edf1-42ec-a9c4-00ff0cbcff9a","1933f8f5-8812-4e24-85bd-cdbdc83f929e","194f3e22-f4b6-483b-9333-762c3a3b6b9d","1a066d87-0093-4ca8-9c10-84c004b76c48","1a806023-ac1d-4da2-924e-25821c2554f5","1a87f314-ec7e-4407-96f2-0995e8d26fc0","1addfba0-b7e9-4722-85be-a642cdf63571","1ae756d4-675e-4a08-bc7d-ba6a3e922d5d","1b1069d2-3f50-4dd3-a8bd-0aeed6bacf98","1b74e29d-f583-4ee4-96bc-e93553c915b3","1bb0d3e5-6f04-4d91-a899-8b6f59bc228a","1c7ea343-020a-4266-9854-b12ebfa2cf50","1c8fe57c-2cee-4f73-a5f3-6ee4051024e7","1de4a13b-1497-421e-b5bc-a8ebbc7a3b18","1de65c17-36dd-4ba6-ada6-bcd98b556aad","1df33743-1016-49ce-981b-862125c0893f","1e6b9f5b-a065-4242-ae58-1f105455955f","1fe9639d-5c39-472e-94a7-73ac2b03bfce","2010c6e2-c9cb-4a3e-b22b-8cabf1044074","2013c452-d1c8-41a0-abea-92e26d231790","21fb2b00-9b86-4924-9a0d-248f976cfd93","22261df7-8974-447f-a1cf-192c59528f64","2255e304-d6ef-4707-b594-cbc3955019ec","229a7f40-f956-476e-8c84-3fd9ed3d6c29","22bf4101-c33b-4711-b6e3-379968f7c217","23a5dd2a-a53c-44b8-8b86-37e04d4cf1ee","23ff1efe-782a-4174-8f33-41a3ff0e8c44","2499d49c-748f-41d8-84d9-eed7a66ad43a","255ac21d-c17e-4926-9dad-13db7698ed72","2679a7a3-abde-4979-ac6e-5cf24113e0db","268e5866-7aea-4546-934f-f105a70b1096","26ac5726-fd69-42b8-a80e-6a71b91ba466","26b11917-4e55-41d5-aeb1-64e8b44bedba","2719a94d-d523-4fef-bfd9-a1bef16dd951","28a03096-e60c-4adb-b4fa-55f0bd28a95d","292b562c-132b-47cc-9030-d2544e801e7e","29a173b3-4587-4257-9c93-2f0c483079c5","2a59f77c-89ba-49fe-be6c-b3c9756a9940","2ad1f047-985c-4c59-aa13-749fa75bcba9","2b442757-da6a-46e5-ae37-b083e00062d3","2c075e82-3fe3-4b95-a68a-f0fad41e51f5","2d8a95d1-8554-4194-b427-4239c3f9ad5b","2f23ec7d-e712-46f5-ae1c-5e7634725242","2fc5c9f1-64d2-498f-8f7a-96d94b926f6d","2fe1bef6-e797-4d9f-bb5b-6f936d7a55dc","2fede3c0-46a7-46e8-a776-5a6fd6d3f08e","301bb818-ff44-4346-9ffe-ad58bf13cfb2","31cae76c-aa62-4328-bd40-368275f60e9f","31f1f824-c698-4b97-a52a-1a1136a9ac6e","3278338f-1fa0-4045-9701-e237d5ad0930","3282adec-c328-4317-a091-a126587d78de","32bc8e29-1313-4d9b-86ff-8c3bb665f057","33326887-4ed0-4562-a0ac-b889d6ad53a9","336a89c4-d98a-4242-8803-4d479689bc4d","3401730f-3850-4c7d-884f-dcdb1d086c42","34b8b88f-e283-46cd-ba6e-f373dc3d4395","34dc1c1f-d12c-4230-bb1c-e41b6961f288","3624ed70-d464-4caa-9b4e-4dfc2ed435dc","368930a7-2085-43bd-bb79-62d471c9e75c","36a70fc6-de5a-494c-9dc5-801fe7a7a53d","3797cfc4-05a5-422b-b823-ed3bb850f540","3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","3865528e-cbb8-4615-af7d-f9ab01e9fe4d","38d24327-d93d-472b-99ac-246351c7dbfd","3911de79-cbfd-4eaa-9311-207b452faa93","394a5ff5-76f3-4885-87ed-4a6879611c22","39a9fb26-817d-404e-a150-4e4c5ebc037c","39e61860-2a60-448c-838e-a7f01e4d0c5c","3c0e9d23-f858-47eb-8e7a-23db1d42822a","3cdd0ffb-841b-4883-9b1a-df7b28022554","3d6b98eb-c79e-460c-883b-9c997ffea009","3e2829b3-2380-49cb-a370-77a313e8eaa1","3e325b99-7611-4f89-8963-7f79c5ac4105","3f674523-5416-4b89-8cab-fe3ddf3c9e7e","411b1d1a-7b18-4425-90f0-da2c296625eb","4216dab3-b436-422a-a6ee-74b5858f7aa2","4260e03f-c3cd-480c-827c-7ebe3a09e913","4299b01d-c5ab-4283-ae2d-31aa1fdbbfec","432f2c6e-3092-44cd-bf1b-54249b31ad6b","438c4f31-19bd-4ff3-bed4-035569ec6cbf","43de8661-2844-46b7-bb39-15eb17f6b82e","43e20f96-27cb-4f67-b7e5-6228aea8e7b6","445ff19b-5429-4a55-be3f-c4b03481b04f","4469e268-1b01-49b7-a436-ea4a88ba6269","451d9824-7933-403d-beaa-1ac6398509c9","45fdd40d-5bc4-4fe7-9eb9-883c55f14a70","46441742-607f-484f-80fe-b1334048144a","4661fe17-e88d-41ab-a8c6-9aefcbbaed5c","471bc3da-bbd4-417c-875a-595a713be7fd","4726ed7e-d61a-4a2c-9e05-59cbaa4f1bf0","473ed916-1979-4222-b1e8-38d39c51fe03","47635cd8-696c-4adf-94ed-338f084a3d62","484a6113-0a95-4624-8291-c00710260e4d","4974f73f-37bc-4300-8d31-d97ca337365b","4a021f95-539e-4217-98a0-d651be9a3b47","4a638904-2bcf-4037-8afd-ec6e5b0b6b11","4c67d899-fab5-4e78-9274-526d6a4fe0bb","4cd73621-691c-4866-91c1-0b99d0d1a89a","4d6ab7d0-4e16-4d1b-aa49-7f453c9352b6","4d7063c6-5201-4ce1-89ed-75ee21d51b98","4eb18b90-e310-48db-9531-68b146420749","4f3026f8-7217-4bf9-af6e-71bcad8bb1c5","4fa075c9-a30f-47e5-8f09-158017bfd6d6","502ff9a1-ac00-4ef2-96cb-0a0614085766","504dd102-6089-4fcb-a066-0006720862a7","5118358f-2777-4bfd-a761-adb4bc1da763","51a534c1-9193-4b8c-bbd2-b4e368930ead","5245dc0a-5d68-4a00-ad89-6255f3bee930","526515f5-4a82-4b0b-9e1c-7f3a2aa4cde4","52bd3a8a-1c92-484d-8be6-5f7e4a7274e1","534ab39c-32c3-46ea-a742-5095170a0003","5374dadc-cd7f-41df-b8d9-8ef7c10ec693","53f8ec9a-900f-481f-bfb5-a6ca452416ed","5406e730-2d78-47b4-ba27-fc933e691eab","54637d34-f16e-4e98-84c1-681a0fca559c","54686005-b842-4cc5-82b1-0276e36a42b6","550bda80-b5be-488a-89f6-64b9698b4033","554708da-6872-4a1b-91cc-3beeb59fbf2e","55552c00-e696-4ac2-951e-156364cb1337","5710a503-9fbe-46ae-abd5-2663069b70db","57b2326c-e877-4995-82fc-221eda139718","5804b97c-c416-49d1-9fbd-5bb52c0595dd","58163259-bc87-4025-a6cc-f3a0848b52cf","58ac029e-4204-42c4-8ff3-6dbd84dd382a","58c8e8bf-9cbd-46dd-8a8b-b1b5cbb0d58d","590fff58-7ba9-4a5b-8232-4c27d67f13b1","5a7bde0b-59e0-4f86-9b63-2bbebb593d41","5c86116b-5fae-45a9-b467-01fc8b26a166","5d222c9b-8733-4d3b-abaa-59f77da35546","5f6c5fd0-a2f8-4bfe-9ac4-a8d06bc8640a","5fa4530c-d60b-48c1-b6b2-371abff6d77a","60ccacb1-7c41-4259-b651-bfbf60e7b53a","6135126e-45b3-4fe7-a80f-82248b08ea7b","61a00782-20f7-4170-b4e2-d9d9157b3a3c","620bfde0-ec72-4b52-bfa4-e06ce3b56960","62bc0e3c-1d90-4688-bc1b-e00f620c5c8c","634a0a0f-0899-427f-9396-6cc3c5442643","6411a3a1-2932-41eb-b497-f9a2400de74c","64902247-dbff-448d-987f-c89ac2e30538","66bb816a-1961-4e45-8460-9328304c7956","6721b632-2b4f-492a-840d-bb05d2a9f1af","672ecfdb-cb9d-485d-8fc1-76e6a8269fe7","67c4a0dd-5f32-4dde-b733-4a4a9e5dfafb","68753b50-8fe7-4499-bb2d-ddfcc7e16c94","6901ef7b-f98a-4b3a-b622-85196fe10ffb","696bb9a6-aa69-4de4-a566-5df21482bc51","6a44ea24-a3bf-4ad8-96b1-5ae56cefb84c","6ab671c9-310c-4d88-bd88-0251180b2345","6cf864fb-5956-4416-a1c5-f42153e66ec4","6ee56cf3-78f2-4420-bede-08f76397b2fb","6f00035b-1437-428d-895c-a234866e29e0","6f4adcf4-c63b-41c9-b7f6-0b0f4e75c857","706246bb-b5c8-4d73-81fa-2e93d040c762","706f0136-7ae5-45f2-b804-e3a8c9a14d1c","70b9c7ef-3983-40dd-b904-5607537ff37f","71196507-ad87-406f-a4df-edc8a14b1575","73066633-67a8-4240-8c5a-3c4ae29b486d","73369c4a-c44b-4b7a-b3cc-07766ccb4e2a","73e97a89-5b5f-4104-bc6a-50b8f564040a","747400a0-bfad-4fa2-8004-06f237d1c543","75eac450-5d76-45da-975a-a47f1515ca01","75f7eb04-35fe-48ce-af4a-d0ccf3067076","77ed2567-2595-48f0-891b-a753164f2866","7855cb39-b177-4d3b-bd72-0a18afd5415b","79cfeedd-0cef-4026-962d-c86d241c4e56","79f059b8-00b2-4345-ad46-440c7bc371df","7a539249-77a2-4e2b-a29f-6952304d80d7","7a59b547-cf09-4b46-bbfe-d7a7f34b7cfc","7a707681-5edc-461c-b5a8-0057a374f3cc","7b3b345d-0902-4461-a6bc-747c26feb7f2","7c914cb3-8ba1-4768-ac56-a051b75a6e8b","7ddc7283-670a-4dfb-9e38-a11aa0c579c2","8151434e-f600-47a9-93df-16b483e88961","815dcb75-691c-4066-a898-b7ed46fdbdf2","816a43e1-6b33-4a27-a385-9d12dd8e924f","8187d86e-f46c-4e26-8188-a4e7b31de2f6","81b21166-1d16-4aec-910f-b382f9680f5f","81f9e1b1-71fd-45a2-9292-017420336059","8205ac1a-be22-438c-b3e0-f7aa463d3501","824601ea-5309-4ddf-bc61-486c992e309c","835cbabf-d424-4f04-89cb-1d8c0b08f1ab","83bf777b-6ee5-4e82-bd85-6e374853473a","84512e93-e51a-4c89-88dd-ecc2afc0699a","84a895b3-81ad-42e9-b54d-614c66aca856","84ea460e-bfc2-4977-aebb-32594a90693b","85680853-3899-4f21-b262-dbe3e8893779","8577ca11-d1ef-4517-846f-747a51b46f07","867c2a12-155a-4309-aff0-300c6125824c","86b559ac-3645-468b-9f43-7d961bd255d7","8779026e-22f2-4276-a7b9-695e4e569057","892c7a97-bb6b-47a5-9402-8a5293acf25b","897c7de9-ed19-4ee2-a2d5-85b75355519d","89e1831f-7c8d-46ad-b545-7b0e141b1fa7","8aaa4093-987c-4a1d-8fbd-8e1d1e495fe3","8b1ef2e6-f7a2-4db0-9589-42159cf06574","8d8b9ba9-5da4-4861-89db-348400c8ef68","8e0f3d53-2c44-474d-9787-4713b7050c28","8e4f2f4a-8039-4ba0-9b6d-beecad106136","8eb102f2-a097-496b-8975-3d2cd6e31a8d","8ecfae6d-fb77-4dfe-9f9b-f1425d8a13da","8ef8782e-cc91-4ddc-95d5-d260f1b7a518","905b10d3-5531-40bc-b5e3-84beb79f1af2","91aa9ca8-e7d7-4036-a22f-5c8c8e7fc2ce","920f5e05-04f9-4545-b26d-ea48a1f18a2f","9285d418-e4e3-40a1-b1d1-da857748bfd3","92b301e8-97fb-47a7-94a6-b858beb0a1fb","9368fe71-a18d-4580-8063-8e3f17e6cec9","9379cea2-647c-459b-af54-770e31e9bbe1","93c87fee-61ec-4ea8-bd4f-3434669835ee","93ec7040-a06c-4da5-b0b1-626399456a8a","944709d1-19c5-461e-a509-d35f5314cc8e","948eda84-20a8-442d-8a0a-ffba051904a4","94d114b9-3c47-468e-8714-ed449f90e8e4","94faca18-b471-4748-8bab-f399641cedbd","95044e07-ad37-43f6-95b0-cebe1e9f8ce0","95b8351c-9ddb-457d-9035-ad3b6d181dc7","96621df7-0c9b-41e5-a5a6-3f21a24613d5","96adc5c1-5a68-473e-9d38-85bed792c8fc","97c9d44f-1ca4-489d-a786-dc23f1fe1175","980db746-8492-4784-ab7e-f6c3b10378e1","9849e210-d94b-448b-885e-7bdffe11cfe9","9bd6a50e-945d-42d4-88de-97e83b4c3b06","9c74f902-2ef0-4269-b436-acc19aa11ea5","9c81b00b-87e1-4cce-bfc8-9583b3b8a234","9cbf8104-4fa2-4365-bc32-09eb2d1c9381","9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","9d92713b-a9c4-4b7e-87f4-c4fd443e38b5","9f454843-a34c-4619-a576-493f835993b4","9fe3b91d-3719-4260-926a-d5711bd1efc4","a06cd968-9dc5-42c5-a6e8-3d3c36dfc8c2","a18ba308-f8ab-4590-b466-daf80aa2b59c","a3aeeb23-ea47-454e-9079-05e2142e157d","a3ce7cd2-ee71-42ce-b4f7-96a81c6bd295","a45c3495-d077-4241-b1d7-72fa109d0e6b","a6385d09-ca9d-4f95-b5ba-4f50630bec35","a7002128-c4bc-48cd-bed1-46a529e69132","a7cc57e8-71f7-4536-ba7c-452e09344a18","a96905fe-9d68-4a0c-9c4e-ce250411fcd9","a9c15856-f188-45d4-80a8-7929118af59a","aa57f0d8-8cb4-4c4c-8ef4-4c4acdef25e4","ab7d0ab2-d774-415c-bd3f-a606f92ef3c3","abb94f1c-6bf3-442d-9749-eacc170b025c","ac5e071a-48a2-4a53-a1f6-5fc7b6d35280","adad636e-6844-49cb-bb07-54ff4f1a044f","add15855-56e0-4264-819c-b8e8110846aa","adfa4015-b34e-4488-99e4-b20b4dc10324","aec84261-126b-4386-b0f4-15f160ca67ae","aed9cf49-b6d3-4952-8acb-37e1eae1c31a","b26721cc-ba4b-460e-a726-17bebda4c82e","b293dea5-f7e1-4889-a56d-f823569cdff4","b3b632d3-bab8-43e4-9749-51b79e59f7dd","b3e58970-8bf0-4e37-a8f9-dd4fce60bf46","b40ee428-0e50-4a51-aca9-a9074c0486cf","b4a8aa1a-7262-4318-9579-9fff20f959a6","b4b614f7-a43d-4e57-9766-25f7fef90d68","b556af30-b2db-4273-8b3b-a5b1ec113ebb","b55fc156-b5e6-49b6-b4f1-e092d3b4f553","b5940660-7f58-4123-bb25-6f78d4e1694d","b6a4c3c9-311e-4a4f-beaf-d0012bbfbf51","b77861f3-9e86-4450-a13f-4522abb6a8ef","b78601e1-6600-408f-bc8c-52407a676ecb","b8eebc63-ef4e-4144-9327-420f594806c6","bc813ec4-3453-4fe2-a5d0-884fdb51bfc7","bcd183c8-344e-4cb8-8561-8c2e6a027897","bcd80071-6449-4036-accf-62939d2bc771","bdc8358e-29a2-4efa-a99e-6023a27df35b","bf5cf44c-c3df-4c9c-b13b-8a0108b8a106","c0981bc0-6d81-46d5-a2fc-715c6a5662b8","c2853c18-cc20-43b6-bd36-3b77725ba1d7","c2875090-e4c1-4cec-be8a-7218c8774f6b","c349f006-e1f4-498e-970a-626a724e2231","c3aa82e4-0707-4514-a535-22d6d4a7f0b2","c51ad2dc-5440-4692-bdac-73968c6ad4d2","c5597192-fe4a-479a-8bf7-cdcf15d74d10","c66f7c07-f922-4abd-8805-71a0fade560f","c6b3635d-7479-4594-9803-195c9d36f4a1","c6dcef79-69bf-47eb-a0b5-7b4d6bef00fc","c6e1c64f-1094-4a24-9d3e-8103fb4d94ab","c6e6e3f3-bc85-48dc-ad18-bb08d31d7308","c7589046-9f75-46b4-bd78-c3fe0703df52","c7803b74-2f5d-47d0-a09e-c27ed98ec1a3","c7af7c66-9a6d-42c8-8695-bcd164ed856b","c8ddee14-df38-49aa-9d85-a7c6b34273a6","c999d71f-777d-4d80-9f37-37391f97acd4","caae3943-065a-475a-a6fe-f5706ce3db97","cb333cad-a0a7-4971-8f06-e4ca49e58c39","cbdf7850-c12b-44e7-9a2a-2e88994f389f","cd235f2c-1119-4002-b756-61e2983b0232","cddf4a6a-4d4e-4d8b-9631-734b807f7215","ce0c52be-896a-479c-b92b-09bf3518d332","cf1f664f-fab8-46ef-9768-c3fc897d3913","cf35dad3-c846-4c5e-91db-577efd256f78","cfa001c3-f0fc-45cd-8a71-3e35d2026e1f","cfd3be60-c380-4a63-8e12-5fd8af9b72bd","d11fa038-1162-4d93-9df5-6d5b35b8628b","d156577c-5001-4f1b-90f7-d7b21a37497b","d18985ea-8239-498e-9147-eda1d0bb8bde","d20d6d55-e1d9-462f-902a-31987fc17f06","d2c92cf6-2a73-4e89-adff-db3cb523f8e1","d301dc8a-7194-46ad-bf04-43efdc78c053","d315d00d-a3eb-4c0f-9554-c1395585910f","d3bd5582-331f-4b89-96d8-d988dabaecd2","d3c6617c-2925-40b2-aa72-9b0b6c5e83d4","d405b9b8-3fd3-4230-a3d3-ccdd34abd185","d5ff3294-0ecd-48eb-b9dd-a2c0282a055a","d6f9dd1e-cee9-48ff-a7e7-71d7a7b8f61d","d7c49d74-0c9c-470b-94ad-c7ccaa111eaf","d7f7d93d-fda2-48cd-89a3-7b5c35ec6480","d8ab6193-0742-4b7e-99ea-f1131b5fc36f","d96f8ae8-4753-4f7b-9ec5-3238eca05841","d9794536-257f-4a12-8d46-a7c0c649fb97","dab486f0-dfe1-46a8-b0d8-32e2a200b8e8","db8eb9e3-f6e6-4be4-b6d2-d135a6c3e9ac","dc0f107c-d6af-40f2-b8fd-d6a8264071a5","dc9b6179-78d1-4eec-9df7-47aadc6c4002","dd99547d-81d1-4764-ba78-52a1cddf906d","ddada193-97b9-4ccc-8a51-bfbea77a0c06","e06bafea-36a4-40ac-8e47-2a2619fd46fd","e1083f09-5ed1-4bdf-8ac5-3c65482b8e5f","e1955bc5-123d-4ca0-b875-2d75b1f718f1","e1bbca7c-14db-40cf-a128-0219f12466a3","e256486b-ee32-4d0f-9cba-d02bf4bd780a","e27aa94c-fa47-4a58-bc17-1e5d3387b739","e2a4561f-b8bf-4ca9-9990-3b885eaf5c2b","e2f38cc3-06ff-4db2-8aad-a537c1e1d0c8","e446ef0a-2a74-42bf-bcd6-2b793506650e","e4aba04c-81ff-438c-a506-881ff2436c82","e500f58c-3afd-4143-b4d2-f60500bf9023","e53f3cca-ca53-449c-9f09-737f317fb169","e57d61a5-e3ec-423d-ad96-243fbfae502b","e6d36e44-00e2-4f9e-95b1-e892e44117eb","e6e7e00b-0ede-4741-8419-066a93e431cd","e6f33250-4650-42ce-96e8-87ce7eebc853","e70df749-9305-44b3-8a30-defc332a7fa4","e7a8eb39-66a7-4777-a0d6-cfb00f8f0798","e8fbbd18-0c64-4437-9ea9-4b4877081943","e9029bad-f0af-4178-8545-61b8bf20d98f","ea0bba2c-7a56-40f2-afac-00f638b54fc3","ea27969f-7a0b-4e5c-9893-7763d5fdbfbf","ea51c75b-4b85-48fb-bbb7-8fde23c110aa","ea6c8861-7a39-4e19-8e71-58720131fa8d","eac2c9bd-6ddc-48dc-92e0-405c318acfb0","eb7f5240-b11f-4c58-9681-91c05d2c3f50","eb84cbb3-24d1-4565-9ec1-8bd3b9d4bec9","ed2c35d4-102a-4b73-8382-2ac35610faed","edf6b48c-90dc-4757-814e-999556997808","eec20343-5ffa-486c-b431-59ca5e4568d4","ef391115-fde1-44aa-ab00-abb8e2e7ec82","efb7c5ac-4ac5-4964-80cb-f95ebaa0e04c","f0a80593-3eca-497d-afa0-90d16a414e1d","f121b53e-c2bd-4ce5-878c-fd5a64863273","f1307eae-cbfb-4f04-b6cc-3facd9e296d6","f19a484a-77bd-4389-8266-523228328091","f1ba13f7-7414-47ce-9df3-a6aa0902c1b9","f1f602c9-64cd-4bfc-855c-fb8060a9c483","f24f8cd0-0ca1-49cf-8cf1-4a5e6b938fe3","f25f2d19-18b4-4e7e-ad7b-8f30a193b3d6","f267ac1f-eff8-417a-8920-f8d37e384f79","f289c668-0c40-41e6-82af-ae6829b262d4","f319102d-533a-41ff-9f08-6bda6778bb7e","f40851bc-e6e8-4605-ba83-f44d932b4760","f4c53608-9890-4b9f-89a3-7c1028bc1e05","f502d85e-d523-4b8c-9dec-469aa08204df","f5653eaf-7d13-4c91-93c7-e30daca2ec3a","f5876a8c-263e-4134-a5b2-ba2453ed9080","f58af8d2-a271-4586-b2b4-1b399c9f84de","f5c77efa-f72b-424c-a810-81cd552ba3de","f62defd3-7975-4edf-8f34-40a36b487ac8","f6e3366d-13bc-4a60-94b6-f77a2c2032c0","f75dd4aa-d0bc-4078-857d-76a41f9df08f","f9720bd0-18fb-4774-96e6-eca25490f73e","fa1e38b4-4ced-4f4b-9a7b-b1b89ff13da7","fa93085f-260f-4f91-af1c-c85c03ca06fa","fb4d21e7-be93-4775-905f-977427db28c4","fc91133d-e4b6-4458-8d6c-cb1af7bcd97e","fdc662ec-5ed7-4d04-8993-6144ff01abc2","fe4e9bc0-2802-4dd8-97e4-27704fad2a1b","fec4e8d2-6a2f-4046-b9d4-85a831f76655","fee252e0-d871-44c1-8917-1fd2d148377a","ff092982-3b6e-4f4c-8194-6b8201ee1246","ff4c3069-118e-4f08-aa39-6394130a8ec4","oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-06d5928124689ba0","oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-081117bbf714a215","oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0","oil-0d7b13a282f9b466","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","oil-13fd5c31e278a577","oil-1852e8a212bd5903","oil-1c3f4e35a1252449","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-63426d939d718e7f","oil-63f43befc46e25fa","oil-66b89ef48f4536a9","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-7ced813eb9eb1314","oil-7ed3f9582cae741d","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-846611108e27fafb","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-86a403aef71f924e","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-8e1ede70f7533502","oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77","oil-94951aba738c80b3","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-9c21da748413e6f9","oil-9f582ea75e0eddfb","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-a882a3e8b7aeb487","oil-a9685f88d15906f6","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-b434a85e1e9196d0","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-c1a2f95596a3b00d","oil-c2fa50179af284f7","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-ce4031737a7654b3","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-d276b566dce62194","oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","oil-d479413f1e610f85","oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-f1693a0670f7b784","oil-f5b6386895404f0b","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f96a10806285c261","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-fc5474312cf8529f","oil-fc714f38909e4348","oil-fcda56b4bb45ffd3","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9","oil-ff34df409a4806f1"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["adulteration"]},{"id":"issue_types:entry:food-fraud-and-authenticity:substitution","name":"Substitution","definition":"The expected food or ingredient is replaced wholly or partly by another material.","occurrences":65,"article_count":63,"event_count":65,"article_ids":["0af3703f-23ec-4f8f-a1b6-45b4adb68b12","0d14295d-a954-4163-8974-ecb51bd464e8","0facca96-d90c-4f21-ba98-356f7f6b1622","1b1069d2-3f50-4dd3-a8bd-0aeed6bacf98","1de4a13b-1497-421e-b5bc-a8ebbc7a3b18","2010c6e2-c9cb-4a3e-b22b-8cabf1044074","255ac21d-c17e-4926-9dad-13db7698ed72","2d8a95d1-8554-4194-b427-4239c3f9ad5b","32bc8e29-1313-4d9b-86ff-8c3bb665f057","34dc1c1f-d12c-4230-bb1c-e41b6961f288","3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","3d6b98eb-c79e-460c-883b-9c997ffea009","3e325b99-7611-4f89-8963-7f79c5ac4105","47635cd8-696c-4adf-94ed-338f084a3d62","4c67d899-fab5-4e78-9274-526d6a4fe0bb","4d7063c6-5201-4ce1-89ed-75ee21d51b98","4f3026f8-7217-4bf9-af6e-71bcad8bb1c5","5d222c9b-8733-4d3b-abaa-59f77da35546","6135126e-45b3-4fe7-a80f-82248b08ea7b","706f0136-7ae5-45f2-b804-e3a8c9a14d1c","75eac450-5d76-45da-975a-a47f1515ca01","7855cb39-b177-4d3b-bd72-0a18afd5415b","824601ea-5309-4ddf-bc61-486c992e309c","835cbabf-d424-4f04-89cb-1d8c0b08f1ab","96adc5c1-5a68-473e-9d38-85bed792c8fc","9c81b00b-87e1-4cce-bfc8-9583b3b8a234","9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","9d92713b-a9c4-4b7e-87f4-c4fd443e38b5","9f454843-a34c-4619-a576-493f835993b4","ab7d0ab2-d774-415c-bd3f-a606f92ef3c3","adfa4015-b34e-4488-99e4-b20b4dc10324","aec84261-126b-4386-b0f4-15f160ca67ae","b4b614f7-a43d-4e57-9766-25f7fef90d68","bdc8358e-29a2-4efa-a99e-6023a27df35b","c6e6e3f3-bc85-48dc-ad18-bb08d31d7308","c999d71f-777d-4d80-9f37-37391f97acd4","cf35dad3-c846-4c5e-91db-577efd256f78","e06bafea-36a4-40ac-8e47-2a2619fd46fd","e1bbca7c-14db-40cf-a128-0219f12466a3","e2f38cc3-06ff-4db2-8aad-a537c1e1d0c8","e57d61a5-e3ec-423d-ad96-243fbfae502b","eb7f5240-b11f-4c58-9681-91c05d2c3f50","ed2c35d4-102a-4b73-8382-2ac35610faed","efb7c5ac-4ac5-4964-80cb-f95ebaa0e04c","f25f2d19-18b4-4e7e-ad7b-8f30a193b3d6","f289c668-0c40-41e6-82af-ae6829b262d4","oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-ff34df409a4806f1"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["substitution"]},{"id":"issue_types:entry:food-fraud-and-authenticity:counterfeit","name":"Counterfeit","definition":"A product is presented as an authentic brand or food when it is allegedly fake.","occurrences":58,"article_count":58,"event_count":58,"article_ids":["0a23e582-3dac-4091-bf36-a08d511a3763","0e518ac8-dc53-4c79-938a-bd26c1142eeb","0ea7c6a7-d2c1-498f-aa00-f3fc942206ed","15f9d255-f348-4fb7-ba3d-003ab6adcfb2","1df33743-1016-49ce-981b-862125c0893f","229a7f40-f956-476e-8c84-3fd9ed3d6c29","2719a94d-d523-4fef-bfd9-a1bef16dd951","2fc5c9f1-64d2-498f-8f7a-96d94b926f6d","2fe1bef6-e797-4d9f-bb5b-6f936d7a55dc","3278338f-1fa0-4045-9701-e237d5ad0930","36a70fc6-de5a-494c-9dc5-801fe7a7a53d","3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","3c0e9d23-f858-47eb-8e7a-23db1d42822a","43de8661-2844-46b7-bb39-15eb17f6b82e","43e20f96-27cb-4f67-b7e5-6228aea8e7b6","473ed916-1979-4222-b1e8-38d39c51fe03","4a021f95-539e-4217-98a0-d651be9a3b47","4fa075c9-a30f-47e5-8f09-158017bfd6d6","502ff9a1-ac00-4ef2-96cb-0a0614085766","526515f5-4a82-4b0b-9e1c-7f3a2aa4cde4","52bd3a8a-1c92-484d-8be6-5f7e4a7274e1","5710a503-9fbe-46ae-abd5-2663069b70db","5a7bde0b-59e0-4f86-9b63-2bbebb593d41","672ecfdb-cb9d-485d-8fc1-76e6a8269fe7","6f4adcf4-c63b-41c9-b7f6-0b0f4e75c857","7ddc7283-670a-4dfb-9e38-a11aa0c579c2","86b559ac-3645-468b-9f43-7d961bd255d7","905b10d3-5531-40bc-b5e3-84beb79f1af2","9379cea2-647c-459b-af54-770e31e9bbe1","94d114b9-3c47-468e-8714-ed449f90e8e4","97c9d44f-1ca4-489d-a786-dc23f1fe1175","9c74f902-2ef0-4269-b436-acc19aa11ea5","9d92713b-a9c4-4b7e-87f4-c4fd443e38b5","a3aeeb23-ea47-454e-9079-05e2142e157d","b3e58970-8bf0-4e37-a8f9-dd4fce60bf46","b5940660-7f58-4123-bb25-6f78d4e1694d","c6e1c64f-1094-4a24-9d3e-8103fb4d94ab","d301dc8a-7194-46ad-bf04-43efdc78c053","e27aa94c-fa47-4a58-bc17-1e5d3387b739","eec20343-5ffa-486c-b431-59ca5e4568d4","f1307eae-cbfb-4f04-b6cc-3facd9e296d6","fdc662ec-5ed7-4d04-8993-6144ff01abc2","oil-05aa031a4b58524e","oil-0d7b13a282f9b466","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-5413f17944743156","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-7269f661e72c703f","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["counterfeit"]},{"id":"issue_types:entry:food-fraud-and-authenticity:mislabeling","name":"Mislabeling","definition":"The label, identity, composition, or declaration does not match the reported product.","occurrences":52,"article_count":52,"event_count":52,"article_ids":["05375704-5b45-4e0a-b388-9944c0c5fc9f","0e518ac8-dc53-4c79-938a-bd26c1142eeb","10f36230-190b-4b13-8cfc-8d12c2f37080","1c8fe57c-2cee-4f73-a5f3-6ee4051024e7","2255e304-d6ef-4707-b594-cbc3955019ec","255ac21d-c17e-4926-9dad-13db7698ed72","2d8a95d1-8554-4194-b427-4239c3f9ad5b","4d7063c6-5201-4ce1-89ed-75ee21d51b98","534ab39c-32c3-46ea-a742-5095170a0003","62bc0e3c-1d90-4688-bc1b-e00f620c5c8c","634a0a0f-0899-427f-9396-6cc3c5442643","66bb816a-1961-4e45-8460-9328304c7956","946d9238-09b9-474e-8481-5e734cedca7a","a06cd968-9dc5-42c5-a6e8-3d3c36dfc8c2","b55fc156-b5e6-49b6-b4f1-e092d3b4f553","caae3943-065a-475a-a6fe-f5706ce3db97","cfd3be60-c380-4a63-8e12-5fd8af9b72bd","ec990258-7999-4c93-81af-59b6ab2c65df","ed2c35d4-102a-4b73-8382-2ac35610faed","f5c77efa-f72b-424c-a810-81cd552ba3de","f62defd3-7975-4edf-8f34-40a36b487ac8","oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-156fd0980ec51fe6","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-4b88eb2520f8cc22","oil-4bd4c6831e9c7077","oil-5413f17944743156","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-63426d939d718e7f","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-fc714f38909e4348","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["mislabeling"]},{"id":"issue_types:entry:food-fraud-and-authenticity:dilution","name":"Dilution","definition":"The product is weakened by adding a lower-value or undeclared material.","occurrences":4,"article_count":4,"event_count":4,"article_ids":["7855cb39-b177-4d3b-bd72-0a18afd5415b","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-ff34df409a4806f1"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["dilution"]}]},{"id":"issue_types:group:food-safety-and-quality","name":"Food safety and quality","definition":"Issues concerning contamination, standards, prohibited additives, or unsafe product condition.","occurrences":155,"article_count":125,"event_count":127,"article_ids":["05375704-5b45-4e0a-b388-9944c0c5fc9f","0d96e6b1-57f6-4555-8711-703a6c818eea","1931e9b4-edf1-42ec-a9c4-00ff0cbcff9a","1de4a13b-1497-421e-b5bc-a8ebbc7a3b18","2b442757-da6a-46e5-ae37-b083e00062d3","301bb818-ff44-4346-9ffe-ad58bf13cfb2","3282adec-c328-4317-a091-a126587d78de","3624ed70-d464-4caa-9b4e-4dfc2ed435dc","3797cfc4-05a5-422b-b823-ed3bb850f540","4216dab3-b436-422a-a6ee-74b5858f7aa2","438c4f31-19bd-4ff3-bed4-035569ec6cbf","445ff19b-5429-4a55-be3f-c4b03481b04f","46441742-607f-484f-80fe-b1334048144a","504dd102-6089-4fcb-a066-0006720862a7","508d009a-650f-4e40-b03d-ebef9d2c069e","534ab39c-32c3-46ea-a742-5095170a0003","5406e730-2d78-47b4-ba27-fc933e691eab","58679f65-396b-4b1f-b725-9907ebc9f038","5fa4530c-d60b-48c1-b6b2-371abff6d77a","634a0a0f-0899-427f-9396-6cc3c5442643","6721b632-2b4f-492a-840d-bb05d2a9f1af","6ab671c9-310c-4d88-bd88-0251180b2345","75f7eb04-35fe-48ce-af4a-d0ccf3067076","91aa9ca8-e7d7-4036-a22f-5c8c8e7fc2ce","94faca18-b471-4748-8bab-f399641cedbd","95044e07-ad37-43f6-95b0-cebe1e9f8ce0","9cbf8104-4fa2-4365-bc32-09eb2d1c9381","9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","aa57f0d8-8cb4-4c4c-8ef4-4c4acdef25e4","add15855-56e0-4264-819c-b8e8110846aa","aec84261-126b-4386-b0f4-15f160ca67ae","bf5cf44c-c3df-4c9c-b13b-8a0108b8a106","c4b35547-a0d3-4cad-b391-177ba64d7c63","c6b3635d-7479-4594-9803-195c9d36f4a1","c999d71f-777d-4d80-9f37-37391f97acd4","caae3943-065a-475a-a6fe-f5706ce3db97","d2f303e3-c25c-412f-8ae4-4ec525f68736","d3c6617c-2925-40b2-aa72-9b0b6c5e83d4","d8ab6193-0742-4b7e-99ea-f1131b5fc36f","dc9b6179-78d1-4eec-9df7-47aadc6c4002","df6dd614-6785-4c3a-b6c7-1e091a751c64","efb7c5ac-4ac5-4964-80cb-f95ebaa0e04c","f319102d-533a-41ff-9f08-6bda6778bb7e","f5c77efa-f72b-424c-a810-81cd552ba3de","faaca14c-514a-4f25-897a-cd9bbc31d5d0","fec4e8d2-6a2f-4046-b9d4-85a831f76655","oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-055a850c7fce9512","oil-05aa031a4b58524e","oil-081117bbf714a215","oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","oil-156fd0980ec51fe6","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-1852e8a212bd5903","oil-1c3f4e35a1252449","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-23d97461886d2622","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-42c4efcdce45e35d","oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-438415c185832786","oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-4b88eb2520f8cc22","oil-4bd4c6831e9c7077","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-63f43befc46e25fa","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-7ed3f9582cae741d","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-86a403aef71f924e","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-9f582ea75e0eddfb","oil-a0831d014f72baf3","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-a882a3e8b7aeb487","oil-a9685f88d15906f6","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-bd1df718191f8f6e","oil-c0e8fd0149fa83c4","oil-c1a2f95596a3b00d","oil-c4d815318f8299b0","oil-c72d68cafd2478be","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-c94e003c369b3450","oil-d276b566dce62194","oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba","oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-e1cd585e16b9635b","oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","oil-e72f16ac2686175c","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f5b6386895404f0b","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-f96a10806285c261","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-fba2e5ff157abb74","oil-fc5474312cf8529f","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"entries":[{"id":"issue_types:entry:food-safety-and-quality:substandard","name":"Substandard","definition":"The product is reported as failing a quality, composition, or safety requirement.","occurrences":92,"article_count":90,"event_count":92,"article_ids":["2b442757-da6a-46e5-ae37-b083e00062d3","301bb818-ff44-4346-9ffe-ad58bf13cfb2","3282adec-c328-4317-a091-a126587d78de","3797cfc4-05a5-422b-b823-ed3bb850f540","438c4f31-19bd-4ff3-bed4-035569ec6cbf","445ff19b-5429-4a55-be3f-c4b03481b04f","5fa4530c-d60b-48c1-b6b2-371abff6d77a","634a0a0f-0899-427f-9396-6cc3c5442643","6721b632-2b4f-492a-840d-bb05d2a9f1af","6ab671c9-310c-4d88-bd88-0251180b2345","75f7eb04-35fe-48ce-af4a-d0ccf3067076","91aa9ca8-e7d7-4036-a22f-5c8c8e7fc2ce","94faca18-b471-4748-8bab-f399641cedbd","add15855-56e0-4264-819c-b8e8110846aa","c4b35547-a0d3-4cad-b391-177ba64d7c63","c6b3635d-7479-4594-9803-195c9d36f4a1","d8ab6193-0742-4b7e-99ea-f1131b5fc36f","dc9b6179-78d1-4eec-9df7-47aadc6c4002","f319102d-533a-41ff-9f08-6bda6778bb7e","faaca14c-514a-4f25-897a-cd9bbc31d5d0","fec4e8d2-6a2f-4046-b9d4-85a831f76655","oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-055a850c7fce9512","oil-05aa031a4b58524e","oil-081117bbf714a215","oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0","oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","oil-156fd0980ec51fe6","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-1852e8a212bd5903","oil-1c3f4e35a1252449","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-23d97461886d2622","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-42c4efcdce45e35d","oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-438415c185832786","oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-4b88eb2520f8cc22","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-63f43befc46e25fa","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-7ed3f9582cae741d","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-86a403aef71f924e","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-9f582ea75e0eddfb","oil-a0831d014f72baf3","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-a882a3e8b7aeb487","oil-a9685f88d15906f6","oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-bd1df718191f8f6e","oil-c0e8fd0149fa83c4","oil-c1a2f95596a3b00d","oil-c4d815318f8299b0","oil-c72d68cafd2478be","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-c94e003c369b3450","oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba","oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","oil-e72f16ac2686175c","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-fba2e5ff157abb74","oil-fc5474312cf8529f","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["substandard"]},{"id":"issue_types:entry:food-safety-and-quality:unsafe-food","name":"Unsafe food","definition":"The report describes a concrete food-safety concern without a narrower issue type.","occurrences":27,"article_count":26,"event_count":27,"article_ids":["05375704-5b45-4e0a-b388-9944c0c5fc9f","1931e9b4-edf1-42ec-a9c4-00ff0cbcff9a","3624ed70-d464-4caa-9b4e-4dfc2ed435dc","4216dab3-b436-422a-a6ee-74b5858f7aa2","46441742-607f-484f-80fe-b1334048144a","504dd102-6089-4fcb-a066-0006720862a7","58679f65-396b-4b1f-b725-9907ebc9f038","95044e07-ad37-43f6-95b0-cebe1e9f8ce0","c999d71f-777d-4d80-9f37-37391f97acd4","d3c6617c-2925-40b2-aa72-9b0b6c5e83d4","oil-055a850c7fce9512","oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-23d97461886d2622","oil-4bd4c6831e9c7077","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","oil-c4d815318f8299b0","oil-c94e003c369b3450","oil-e72f16ac2686175c","oil-f96a10806285c261","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["unsafe_food"]},{"id":"issue_types:entry:food-safety-and-quality:contamination","name":"Contamination","definition":"The product contains an unwanted physical, chemical, or biological contaminant.","occurrences":24,"article_count":24,"event_count":24,"article_ids":["0d96e6b1-57f6-4555-8711-703a6c818eea","1de4a13b-1497-421e-b5bc-a8ebbc7a3b18","508d009a-650f-4e40-b03d-ebef9d2c069e","9cbf8104-4fa2-4365-bc32-09eb2d1c9381","aec84261-126b-4386-b0f4-15f160ca67ae","bf5cf44c-c3df-4c9c-b13b-8a0108b8a106","d2f303e3-c25c-412f-8ae4-4ec525f68736","df6dd614-6785-4c3a-b6c7-1e091a751c64","efb7c5ac-4ac5-4964-80cb-f95ebaa0e04c","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77","oil-a0831d014f72baf3","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-d276b566dce62194","oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba","oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-e1cd585e16b9635b","oil-f5b6386895404f0b"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["contamination"]},{"id":"issue_types:entry:food-safety-and-quality:prohibited-additive","name":"Prohibited additive","definition":"The report identifies an additive that is not permitted for the stated use.","occurrences":9,"article_count":9,"event_count":9,"article_ids":["445ff19b-5429-4a55-be3f-c4b03481b04f","534ab39c-32c3-46ea-a742-5095170a0003","5406e730-2d78-47b4-ba27-fc933e691eab","6ab671c9-310c-4d88-bd88-0251180b2345","d8ab6193-0742-4b7e-99ea-f1131b5fc36f","dc9b6179-78d1-4eec-9df7-47aadc6c4002","f5c77efa-f72b-424c-a810-81cd552ba3de","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-e1cd585e16b9635b"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["prohibited_additive"]},{"id":"issue_types:entry:food-safety-and-quality:unclear","name":"Unclear","definition":"The available evidence does not establish one more specific status.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["aa57f0d8-8cb4-4c4c-8ef4-4c4acdef25e4","caae3943-065a-475a-a6fe-f5706ce3db97"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["unclear"]},{"id":"issue_types:entry:food-safety-and-quality:masking","name":"Masking","definition":"A normalized issue types concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["masking"]}]}]},{"id":"adulterants","label":"Adulterants and reported materials","description":"Named or generic materials represented as adulterants in extracted events.","groups":[{"id":"adulterants:group:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product","name":"Degraded, fake, or unspecified product","definition":"Product-condition descriptions where a more specific adulterant is not established.","occurrences":342,"article_count":249,"event_count":251,"article_ids":["008cc0e4-d7d7-475f-80d8-d81621e7b862","0109eea0-3adc-4177-a6f7-e3bc31bf237d","03ea9124-befd-4983-bcdc-147e3ed3bf73","04c00967-a247-4802-b3c2-3f266885c385","0932679a-fe82-4a1e-949e-9d4fd17ed2a0","0a23e582-3dac-4091-bf36-a08d511a3763","0aa842b8-1ac9-4243-a8b6-5d98d32d6089","0af3703f-23ec-4f8f-a1b6-45b4adb68b12","0d14295d-a954-4163-8974-ecb51bd464e8","0d96e6b1-57f6-4555-8711-703a6c818eea","0e518ac8-dc53-4c79-938a-bd26c1142eeb","0ef4d3e4-844c-47ee-a430-8f171ec4c000","0facca96-d90c-4f21-ba98-356f7f6b1622","15f9d255-f348-4fb7-ba3d-003ab6adcfb2","18f4411e-1d84-42c5-835a-97436ad30c7c","1933f8f5-8812-4e24-85bd-cdbdc83f929e","1addfba0-b7e9-4722-85be-a642cdf63571","1c7ea343-020a-4266-9854-b12ebfa2cf50","1c8fe57c-2cee-4f73-a5f3-6ee4051024e7","1df33743-1016-49ce-981b-862125c0893f","2013c452-d1c8-41a0-abea-92e26d231790","21fb2b00-9b86-4924-9a0d-248f976cfd93","2255e304-d6ef-4707-b594-cbc3955019ec","23a5dd2a-a53c-44b8-8b86-37e04d4cf1ee","2499d49c-748f-41d8-84d9-eed7a66ad43a","255ac21d-c17e-4926-9dad-13db7698ed72","26ac5726-fd69-42b8-a80e-6a71b91ba466","2719a94d-d523-4fef-bfd9-a1bef16dd951","28a03096-e60c-4adb-b4fa-55f0bd28a95d","292b562c-132b-47cc-9030-d2544e801e7e","29a173b3-4587-4257-9c93-2f0c483079c5","2a59f77c-89ba-49fe-be6c-b3c9756a9940","2ad1f047-985c-4c59-aa13-749fa75bcba9","2b442757-da6a-46e5-ae37-b083e00062d3","2f23ec7d-e712-46f5-ae1c-5e7634725242","2fc5c9f1-64d2-498f-8f7a-96d94b926f6d","2fe1bef6-e797-4d9f-bb5b-6f936d7a55dc","2fede3c0-46a7-46e8-a776-5a6fd6d3f08e","301bb818-ff44-4346-9ffe-ad58bf13cfb2","31cae76c-aa62-4328-bd40-368275f60e9f","3278338f-1fa0-4045-9701-e237d5ad0930","3282adec-c328-4317-a091-a126587d78de","33326887-4ed0-4562-a0ac-b889d6ad53a9","3401730f-3850-4c7d-884f-dcdb1d086c42","34dc1c1f-d12c-4230-bb1c-e41b6961f288","36a70fc6-de5a-494c-9dc5-801fe7a7a53d","3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","3865528e-cbb8-4615-af7d-f9ab01e9fe4d","394a5ff5-76f3-4885-87ed-4a6879611c22","39e61860-2a60-448c-838e-a7f01e4d0c5c","3c0e9d23-f858-47eb-8e7a-23db1d42822a","3cdd0ffb-841b-4883-9b1a-df7b28022554","3d6b98eb-c79e-460c-883b-9c997ffea009","3e2829b3-2380-49cb-a370-77a313e8eaa1","4216dab3-b436-422a-a6ee-74b5858f7aa2","43de8661-2844-46b7-bb39-15eb17f6b82e","43e20f96-27cb-4f67-b7e5-6228aea8e7b6","45fdd40d-5bc4-4fe7-9eb9-883c55f14a70","471bc3da-bbd4-417c-875a-595a713be7fd","4726ed7e-d61a-4a2c-9e05-59cbaa4f1bf0","473ed916-1979-4222-b1e8-38d39c51fe03","47635cd8-696c-4adf-94ed-338f084a3d62","4a021f95-539e-4217-98a0-d651be9a3b47","4a638904-2bcf-4037-8afd-ec6e5b0b6b11","4c67d899-fab5-4e78-9274-526d6a4fe0bb","4cd73621-691c-4866-91c1-0b99d0d1a89a","4d7063c6-5201-4ce1-89ed-75ee21d51b98","4eb18b90-e310-48db-9531-68b146420749","4f3026f8-7217-4bf9-af6e-71bcad8bb1c5","4fa075c9-a30f-47e5-8f09-158017bfd6d6","502ff9a1-ac00-4ef2-96cb-0a0614085766","504dd102-6089-4fcb-a066-0006720862a7","508d009a-650f-4e40-b03d-ebef9d2c069e","5245dc0a-5d68-4a00-ad89-6255f3bee930","526515f5-4a82-4b0b-9e1c-7f3a2aa4cde4","534ab39c-32c3-46ea-a742-5095170a0003","53f8ec9a-900f-481f-bfb5-a6ca452416ed","5406e730-2d78-47b4-ba27-fc933e691eab","54637d34-f16e-4e98-84c1-681a0fca559c","550bda80-b5be-488a-89f6-64b9698b4033","55552c00-e696-4ac2-951e-156364cb1337","5710a503-9fbe-46ae-abd5-2663069b70db","58ac029e-4204-42c4-8ff3-6dbd84dd382a","5c86116b-5fae-45a9-b467-01fc8b26a166","5d222c9b-8733-4d3b-abaa-59f77da35546","5fa4530c-d60b-48c1-b6b2-371abff6d77a","60ccacb1-7c41-4259-b651-bfbf60e7b53a","6135126e-45b3-4fe7-a80f-82248b08ea7b","61a00782-20f7-4170-b4e2-d9d9157b3a3c","620bfde0-ec72-4b52-bfa4-e06ce3b56960","62bc0e3c-1d90-4688-bc1b-e00f620c5c8c","672ecfdb-cb9d-485d-8fc1-76e6a8269fe7","6ab671c9-310c-4d88-bd88-0251180b2345","6ee56cf3-78f2-4420-bede-08f76397b2fb","6f4adcf4-c63b-41c9-b7f6-0b0f4e75c857","706246bb-b5c8-4d73-81fa-2e93d040c762","706f0136-7ae5-45f2-b804-e3a8c9a14d1c","70b9c7ef-3983-40dd-b904-5607537ff37f","71196507-ad87-406f-a4df-edc8a14b1575","73066633-67a8-4240-8c5a-3c4ae29b486d","73369c4a-c44b-4b7a-b3cc-07766ccb4e2a","73e97a89-5b5f-4104-bc6a-50b8f564040a","747400a0-bfad-4fa2-8004-06f237d1c543","75eac450-5d76-45da-975a-a47f1515ca01","7855cb39-b177-4d3b-bd72-0a18afd5415b","79f059b8-00b2-4345-ad46-440c7bc371df","7a539249-77a2-4e2b-a29f-6952304d80d7","7a707681-5edc-461c-b5a8-0057a374f3cc","7b3b345d-0902-4461-a6bc-747c26feb7f2","7ddc7283-670a-4dfb-9e38-a11aa0c579c2","8151434e-f600-47a9-93df-16b483e88961","815dcb75-691c-4066-a898-b7ed46fdbdf2","816a43e1-6b33-4a27-a385-9d12dd8e924f","8187d86e-f46c-4e26-8188-a4e7b31de2f6","81b21166-1d16-4aec-910f-b382f9680f5f","81f9e1b1-71fd-45a2-9292-017420336059","824601ea-5309-4ddf-bc61-486c992e309c","835cbabf-d424-4f04-89cb-1d8c0b08f1ab","83bf777b-6ee5-4e82-bd85-6e374853473a","84512e93-e51a-4c89-88dd-ecc2afc0699a","84ea460e-bfc2-4977-aebb-32594a90693b","85680853-3899-4f21-b262-dbe3e8893779","8577ca11-d1ef-4517-846f-747a51b46f07","8779026e-22f2-4276-a7b9-695e4e569057","8aaa4093-987c-4a1d-8fbd-8e1d1e495fe3","8b1ef2e6-f7a2-4db0-9589-42159cf06574","8d8b9ba9-5da4-4861-89db-348400c8ef68","8ecfae6d-fb77-4dfe-9f9b-f1425d8a13da","8ef8782e-cc91-4ddc-95d5-d260f1b7a518","91aa9ca8-e7d7-4036-a22f-5c8c8e7fc2ce","920f5e05-04f9-4545-b26d-ea48a1f18a2f","9379cea2-647c-459b-af54-770e31e9bbe1","94d114b9-3c47-468e-8714-ed449f90e8e4","94faca18-b471-4748-8bab-f399641cedbd","95b8351c-9ddb-457d-9035-ad3b6d181dc7","96621df7-0c9b-41e5-a5a6-3f21a24613d5","97c9d44f-1ca4-489d-a786-dc23f1fe1175","9c74f902-2ef0-4269-b436-acc19aa11ea5","9c81b00b-87e1-4cce-bfc8-9583b3b8a234","9cbf8104-4fa2-4365-bc32-09eb2d1c9381","9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","9d92713b-a9c4-4b7e-87f4-c4fd443e38b5","9f454843-a34c-4619-a576-493f835993b4","9fe3b91d-3719-4260-926a-d5711bd1efc4","a06cd968-9dc5-42c5-a6e8-3d3c36dfc8c2","a18ba308-f8ab-4590-b466-daf80aa2b59c","a3aeeb23-ea47-454e-9079-05e2142e157d","a45c3495-d077-4241-b1d7-72fa109d0e6b","a7cc57e8-71f7-4536-ba7c-452e09344a18","a9c15856-f188-45d4-80a8-7929118af59a","ab7d0ab2-d774-415c-bd3f-a606f92ef3c3","adad636e-6844-49cb-bb07-54ff4f1a044f","add15855-56e0-4264-819c-b8e8110846aa","adfa4015-b34e-4488-99e4-b20b4dc10324","b26721cc-ba4b-460e-a726-17bebda4c82e","b40ee428-0e50-4a51-aca9-a9074c0486cf","b4a8aa1a-7262-4318-9579-9fff20f959a6","b4b614f7-a43d-4e57-9766-25f7fef90d68","b556af30-b2db-4273-8b3b-a5b1ec113ebb","b55fc156-b5e6-49b6-b4f1-e092d3b4f553","b5940660-7f58-4123-bb25-6f78d4e1694d","bc813ec4-3453-4fe2-a5d0-884fdb51bfc7","bdc8358e-29a2-4efa-a99e-6023a27df35b","bf5cf44c-c3df-4c9c-b13b-8a0108b8a106","c2875090-e4c1-4cec-be8a-7218c8774f6b","c3aa82e4-0707-4514-a535-22d6d4a7f0b2","c6b3635d-7479-4594-9803-195c9d36f4a1","c6e1c64f-1094-4a24-9d3e-8103fb4d94ab","c6e6e3f3-bc85-48dc-ad18-bb08d31d7308","c7589046-9f75-46b4-bd78-c3fe0703df52","c8ddee14-df38-49aa-9d85-a7c6b34273a6","caae3943-065a-475a-a6fe-f5706ce3db97","cb333cad-a0a7-4971-8f06-e4ca49e58c39","ce0c52be-896a-479c-b92b-09bf3518d332","cf35dad3-c846-4c5e-91db-577efd256f78","cfa001c3-f0fc-45cd-8a71-3e35d2026e1f","d156577c-5001-4f1b-90f7-d7b21a37497b","d18985ea-8239-498e-9147-eda1d0bb8bde","d2f303e3-c25c-412f-8ae4-4ec525f68736","d301dc8a-7194-46ad-bf04-43efdc78c053","d5ff3294-0ecd-48eb-b9dd-a2c0282a055a","d7c49d74-0c9c-470b-94ad-c7ccaa111eaf","d7f7d93d-fda2-48cd-89a3-7b5c35ec6480","d8ab6193-0742-4b7e-99ea-f1131b5fc36f","d9794536-257f-4a12-8d46-a7c0c649fb97","dab486f0-dfe1-46a8-b0d8-32e2a200b8e8","dc0f107c-d6af-40f2-b8fd-d6a8264071a5","dc9b6179-78d1-4eec-9df7-47aadc6c4002","dd99547d-81d1-4764-ba78-52a1cddf906d","ddada193-97b9-4ccc-8a51-bfbea77a0c06","df6dd614-6785-4c3a-b6c7-1e091a751c64","e1955bc5-123d-4ca0-b875-2d75b1f718f1","e1bbca7c-14db-40cf-a128-0219f12466a3","e2f38cc3-06ff-4db2-8aad-a537c1e1d0c8","e57d61a5-e3ec-423d-ad96-243fbfae502b","e6e7e00b-0ede-4741-8419-066a93e431cd","e6f33250-4650-42ce-96e8-87ce7eebc853","e70df749-9305-44b3-8a30-defc332a7fa4","e9029bad-f0af-4178-8545-61b8bf20d98f","ea27969f-7a0b-4e5c-9893-7763d5fdbfbf","ea51c75b-4b85-48fb-bbb7-8fde23c110aa","ea6c8861-7a39-4e19-8e71-58720131fa8d","eb7f5240-b11f-4c58-9681-91c05d2c3f50","eb84cbb3-24d1-4565-9ec1-8bd3b9d4bec9","ed2c35d4-102a-4b73-8382-2ac35610faed","edf6b48c-90dc-4757-814e-999556997808","eec20343-5ffa-486c-b431-59ca5e4568d4","ef391115-fde1-44aa-ab00-abb8e2e7ec82","efb7c5ac-4ac5-4964-80cb-f95ebaa0e04c","f19a484a-77bd-4389-8266-523228328091","f1f602c9-64cd-4bfc-855c-fb8060a9c483","f24f8cd0-0ca1-49cf-8cf1-4a5e6b938fe3","f25f2d19-18b4-4e7e-ad7b-8f30a193b3d6","f289c668-0c40-41e6-82af-ae6829b262d4","f319102d-533a-41ff-9f08-6bda6778bb7e","f5653eaf-7d13-4c91-93c7-e30daca2ec3a","f62defd3-7975-4edf-8f34-40a36b487ac8","f75dd4aa-d0bc-4078-857d-76a41f9df08f","fa1e38b4-4ced-4f4b-9a7b-b1b89ff13da7","fb4d21e7-be93-4775-905f-977427db28c4","fc91133d-e4b6-4458-8d6c-cb1af7bcd97e","fdc662ec-5ed7-4d04-8993-6144ff01abc2","oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0","oil-0d7b13a282f9b466","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-8e1ede70f7533502","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-9c21da748413e6f9","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","oil-a882a3e8b7aeb487","oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba","oil-e1cd585e16b9635b","oil-f96a10806285c261","oil-fc5474312cf8529f","oil-ff34df409a4806f1"],"entries":[{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:adulterated-ghee","name":"Adulterated ghee","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":32,"article_count":32,"event_count":32,"article_ids":["008cc0e4-d7d7-475f-80d8-d81621e7b862","0932679a-fe82-4a1e-949e-9d4fd17ed2a0","18f4411e-1d84-42c5-835a-97436ad30c7c","1933f8f5-8812-4e24-85bd-cdbdc83f929e","1c7ea343-020a-4266-9854-b12ebfa2cf50","2499d49c-748f-41d8-84d9-eed7a66ad43a","255ac21d-c17e-4926-9dad-13db7698ed72","2f23ec7d-e712-46f5-ae1c-5e7634725242","2fc5c9f1-64d2-498f-8f7a-96d94b926f6d","3401730f-3850-4c7d-884f-dcdb1d086c42","3865528e-cbb8-4615-af7d-f9ab01e9fe4d","39e61860-2a60-448c-838e-a7f01e4d0c5c","3e2829b3-2380-49cb-a370-77a313e8eaa1","504dd102-6089-4fcb-a066-0006720862a7","534ab39c-32c3-46ea-a742-5095170a0003","54637d34-f16e-4e98-84c1-681a0fca559c","5c86116b-5fae-45a9-b467-01fc8b26a166","60ccacb1-7c41-4259-b651-bfbf60e7b53a","6ab671c9-310c-4d88-bd88-0251180b2345","706f0136-7ae5-45f2-b804-e3a8c9a14d1c","70b9c7ef-3983-40dd-b904-5607537ff37f","73e97a89-5b5f-4104-bc6a-50b8f564040a","8577ca11-d1ef-4517-846f-747a51b46f07","94d114b9-3c47-468e-8714-ed449f90e8e4","add15855-56e0-4264-819c-b8e8110846aa","c7589046-9f75-46b4-bd78-c3fe0703df52","d9794536-257f-4a12-8d46-a7c0c649fb97","e6f33250-4650-42ce-96e8-87ce7eebc853","ea27969f-7a0b-4e5c-9893-7763d5fdbfbf","eb7f5240-b11f-4c58-9681-91c05d2c3f50","fb4d21e7-be93-4775-905f-977427db28c4","fc91133d-e4b6-4458-8d6c-cb1af7bcd97e"],"ontology_types":["adulterant","fflo:Adulterant","fflo:AdulteratedGhee","fflo:AdulterationAct","fkg:Adulterant"],"aliases":["adulterated ghee"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:chemicals","name":"Chemicals","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":20,"article_count":20,"event_count":20,"article_ids":["2013c452-d1c8-41a0-abea-92e26d231790","2255e304-d6ef-4707-b594-cbc3955019ec","3cdd0ffb-841b-4883-9b1a-df7b28022554","5d222c9b-8733-4d3b-abaa-59f77da35546","5fa4530c-d60b-48c1-b6b2-371abff6d77a","7a539249-77a2-4e2b-a29f-6952304d80d7","815dcb75-691c-4066-a898-b7ed46fdbdf2","824601ea-5309-4ddf-bc61-486c992e309c","84512e93-e51a-4c89-88dd-ecc2afc0699a","85680853-3899-4f21-b262-dbe3e8893779","8779026e-22f2-4276-a7b9-695e4e569057","8ecfae6d-fb77-4dfe-9f9b-f1425d8a13da","9c74f902-2ef0-4269-b436-acc19aa11ea5","a3aeeb23-ea47-454e-9079-05e2142e157d","b26721cc-ba4b-460e-a726-17bebda4c82e","dd99547d-81d1-4764-ba78-52a1cddf906d","e1955bc5-123d-4ca0-b875-2d75b1f718f1","e6e7e00b-0ede-4741-8419-066a93e431cd","e70df749-9305-44b3-8a30-defc332a7fa4","e9029bad-f0af-4178-8545-61b8bf20d98f"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant","fflo:ChemicalAdulterant","fflo:SyntheticAdulterant"],"aliases":["chemicals"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:unspecified-material","name":"Unspecified material","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 4 extracted labels.","occurrences":19,"article_count":19,"event_count":19,"article_ids":["1addfba0-b7e9-4722-85be-a642cdf63571","292b562c-132b-47cc-9030-d2544e801e7e","2a59f77c-89ba-49fe-be6c-b3c9756a9940","4726ed7e-d61a-4a2c-9e05-59cbaa4f1bf0","58ac029e-4204-42c4-8ff3-6dbd84dd382a","816a43e1-6b33-4a27-a385-9d12dd8e924f","84ea460e-bfc2-4977-aebb-32594a90693b","95b8351c-9ddb-457d-9035-ad3b6d181dc7","96621df7-0c9b-41e5-a5a6-3f21a24613d5","a7cc57e8-71f7-4536-ba7c-452e09344a18","d8ab6193-0742-4b7e-99ea-f1131b5fc36f","dc9b6179-78d1-4eec-9df7-47aadc6c4002","efb7c5ac-4ac5-4964-80cb-f95ebaa0e04c","f75dd4aa-d0bc-4078-857d-76a41f9df08f","oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-8e1ede70f7533502","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-fc5474312cf8529f"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant","fflo:UnknownAdulterant","fkg:Adulterant","fkg:Chemical","fkg:UnknownAdulterant"],"aliases":["unknown","unknown adulterant","unspecified","unspecified adulterant"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:vegetable-oils","name":"Vegetable oils","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":11,"article_count":11,"event_count":11,"article_ids":["1c8fe57c-2cee-4f73-a5f3-6ee4051024e7","33326887-4ed0-4562-a0ac-b889d6ad53a9","47635cd8-696c-4adf-94ed-338f084a3d62","5245dc0a-5d68-4a00-ad89-6255f3bee930","73066633-67a8-4240-8c5a-3c4ae29b486d","747400a0-bfad-4fa2-8004-06f237d1c543","8779026e-22f2-4276-a7b9-695e4e569057","adad636e-6844-49cb-bb07-54ff4f1a044f","bdc8358e-29a2-4efa-a99e-6023a27df35b","d7f7d93d-fda2-48cd-89a3-7b5c35ec6480","e57d61a5-e3ec-423d-ad96-243fbfae502b"],"ontology_types":["fflo:NaturalAdulterant","fkg:Ingredient"],"aliases":["vegetable oils"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:vegetable-oil","name":"Vegetable oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":9,"article_count":9,"event_count":9,"article_ids":["34dc1c1f-d12c-4230-bb1c-e41b6961f288","36a70fc6-de5a-494c-9dc5-801fe7a7a53d","4cd73621-691c-4866-91c1-0b99d0d1a89a","550bda80-b5be-488a-89f6-64b9698b4033","8151434e-f600-47a9-93df-16b483e88961","97c9d44f-1ca4-489d-a786-dc23f1fe1175","9c74f902-2ef0-4269-b436-acc19aa11ea5","adfa4015-b34e-4488-99e4-b20b4dc10324","edf6b48c-90dc-4757-814e-999556997808"],"ontology_types":["fflo:NaturalAdulterant","fkg:Food"],"aliases":["vegetable oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:fish-oil","name":"Fish oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":8,"article_count":8,"event_count":8,"article_ids":["26ac5726-fd69-42b8-a80e-6a71b91ba466","55552c00-e696-4ac2-951e-156364cb1337","75eac450-5d76-45da-975a-a47f1515ca01","adad636e-6844-49cb-bb07-54ff4f1a044f","ce0c52be-896a-479c-b92b-09bf3518d332","d7f7d93d-fda2-48cd-89a3-7b5c35ec6480","ef391115-fde1-44aa-ab00-abb8e2e7ec82","f19a484a-77bd-4389-8266-523228328091"],"ontology_types":["fflo:NaturalAdulterant"],"aliases":["fish oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:vanaspati","name":"Vanaspati","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":8,"article_count":8,"event_count":8,"article_ids":["0109eea0-3adc-4177-a6f7-e3bc31bf237d","28a03096-e60c-4adb-b4fa-55f0bd28a95d","301bb818-ff44-4346-9ffe-ad58bf13cfb2","4216dab3-b436-422a-a6ee-74b5858f7aa2","a18ba308-f8ab-4590-b466-daf80aa2b59c","c8ddee14-df38-49aa-9d85-a7c6b34273a6","e2f38cc3-06ff-4db2-8aad-a537c1e1d0c8","ea51c75b-4b85-48fb-bbb7-8fde23c110aa"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant","fflo:NaturalAdulterant"],"aliases":["vanaspati"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:lard","name":"Lard","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":7,"article_count":7,"event_count":7,"article_ids":["26ac5726-fd69-42b8-a80e-6a71b91ba466","4c67d899-fab5-4e78-9274-526d6a4fe0bb","55552c00-e696-4ac2-951e-156364cb1337","7855cb39-b177-4d3b-bd72-0a18afd5415b","7b3b345d-0902-4461-a6bc-747c26feb7f2","adad636e-6844-49cb-bb07-54ff4f1a044f","f19a484a-77bd-4389-8266-523228328091"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant","fflo:NaturalAdulterant","fkg:Food"],"aliases":["lard"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:spurious-ghee","name":"Spurious ghee","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":7,"article_count":7,"event_count":7,"article_ids":["0e518ac8-dc53-4c79-938a-bd26c1142eeb","43e20f96-27cb-4f67-b7e5-6228aea8e7b6","6135126e-45b3-4fe7-a80f-82248b08ea7b","8aaa4093-987c-4a1d-8fbd-8e1d1e495fe3","c2875090-e4c1-4cec-be8a-7218c8774f6b","c3aa82e4-0707-4514-a535-22d6d4a7f0b2","c6e1c64f-1094-4a24-9d3e-8103fb4d94ab"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant","fkg:Adulterant","fkg:Food"],"aliases":["spurious ghee"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:beef-tallow","name":"Beef tallow","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":6,"article_count":6,"event_count":6,"article_ids":["55552c00-e696-4ac2-951e-156364cb1337","835cbabf-d424-4f04-89cb-1d8c0b08f1ab","adad636e-6844-49cb-bb07-54ff4f1a044f","ce0c52be-896a-479c-b92b-09bf3518d332","d7f7d93d-fda2-48cd-89a3-7b5c35ec6480","f289c668-0c40-41e6-82af-ae6829b262d4"],"ontology_types":["fflo:NaturalAdulterant"],"aliases":["beef tallow"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:vegetable-fats","name":"Vegetable fats","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":6,"article_count":6,"event_count":6,"article_ids":["45fdd40d-5bc4-4fe7-9eb9-883c55f14a70","71196507-ad87-406f-a4df-edc8a14b1575","7a707681-5edc-461c-b5a8-0057a374f3cc","9c74f902-2ef0-4269-b436-acc19aa11ea5","d7c49d74-0c9c-470b-94ad-c7ccaa111eaf","e2f38cc3-06ff-4db2-8aad-a537c1e1d0c8"],"ontology_types":["fflo:NaturalAdulterant"],"aliases":["vegetable fats"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:coconut-oil","name":"Coconut oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":5,"article_count":5,"event_count":5,"article_ids":["3278338f-1fa0-4045-9701-e237d5ad0930","3c0e9d23-f858-47eb-8e7a-23db1d42822a","4a638904-2bcf-4037-8afd-ec6e5b0b6b11","672ecfdb-cb9d-485d-8fc1-76e6a8269fe7","b5940660-7f58-4123-bb25-6f78d4e1694d"],"ontology_types":["fflo:NaturalAdulterant"],"aliases":["coconut oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:fake-ghee","name":"Fake ghee","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":6,"article_count":5,"event_count":6,"article_ids":["0facca96-d90c-4f21-ba98-356f7f6b1622","2719a94d-d523-4fef-bfd9-a1bef16dd951","2fe1bef6-e797-4d9f-bb5b-6f936d7a55dc","bc813ec4-3453-4fe2-a5d0-884fdb51bfc7","e1bbca7c-14db-40cf-a128-0219f12466a3"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant","fkg:Adulterant"],"aliases":["fake ghee"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:synthetic-ghee","name":"Synthetic ghee","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":5,"article_count":5,"event_count":5,"article_ids":["5406e730-2d78-47b4-ba27-fc933e691eab","9f454843-a34c-4619-a576-493f835993b4","bdc8358e-29a2-4efa-a99e-6023a27df35b","c6e6e3f3-bc85-48dc-ad18-bb08d31d7308","f25f2d19-18b4-4e7e-ad7b-8f30a193b3d6"],"ontology_types":["fflo:SyntheticAdulterant"],"aliases":["synthetic ghee"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:vegetable-fat","name":"Vegetable fat","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":5,"article_count":5,"event_count":5,"article_ids":["4eb18b90-e310-48db-9531-68b146420749","6ee56cf3-78f2-4420-bede-08f76397b2fb","9c81b00b-87e1-4cce-bfc8-9583b3b8a234","d156577c-5001-4f1b-90f7-d7b21a37497b","d5ff3294-0ecd-48eb-b9dd-a2c0282a055a"],"ontology_types":["fflo:NaturalAdulterant"],"aliases":["vegetable fat"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:dalda","name":"Dalda","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":4,"article_count":4,"event_count":4,"article_ids":["3278338f-1fa0-4045-9701-e237d5ad0930","3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","4fa075c9-a30f-47e5-8f09-158017bfd6d6","fdc662ec-5ed7-4d04-8993-6144ff01abc2"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant","fflo:NaturalAdulterant"],"aliases":["dalda"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:foreign-fats","name":"Foreign fats","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":4,"article_count":4,"event_count":4,"article_ids":["471bc3da-bbd4-417c-875a-595a713be7fd","835cbabf-d424-4f04-89cb-1d8c0b08f1ab","8b1ef2e6-f7a2-4db0-9589-42159cf06574","ce0c52be-896a-479c-b92b-09bf3518d332"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["foreign fats"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:ghee","name":"Ghee","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":4,"article_count":4,"event_count":4,"article_ids":["03ea9124-befd-4983-bcdc-147e3ed3bf73","61a00782-20f7-4170-b4e2-d9d9157b3a3c","706246bb-b5c8-4d73-81fa-2e93d040c762","8ef8782e-cc91-4ddc-95d5-d260f1b7a518"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant","fkg:Food","fkg:Ingredient"],"aliases":["ghee"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:mosquitoes","name":"Mosquitoes","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":4,"article_count":4,"event_count":4,"article_ids":["508d009a-650f-4e40-b03d-ebef9d2c069e","9cbf8104-4fa2-4365-bc32-09eb2d1c9381","bf5cf44c-c3df-4c9c-b13b-8a0108b8a106","d2f303e3-c25c-412f-8ae4-4ec525f68736"],"ontology_types":["fflo:ContaminantAdulterant"],"aliases":["mosquitoes"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:refined-oil","name":"Refined oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":4,"article_count":4,"event_count":4,"article_ids":["3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","4d7063c6-5201-4ce1-89ed-75ee21d51b98","a3aeeb23-ea47-454e-9079-05e2142e157d","d301dc8a-7194-46ad-bf04-43efdc78c053"],"ontology_types":["fflo:NaturalAdulterant","fkg:Food"],"aliases":["refined oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:substandard-ghee","name":"Substandard ghee","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":4,"article_count":4,"event_count":4,"article_ids":["3282adec-c328-4317-a091-a126587d78de","53f8ec9a-900f-481f-bfb5-a6ca452416ed","cb333cad-a0a7-4971-8f06-e4ca49e58c39","f319102d-533a-41ff-9f08-6bda6778bb7e"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant","fkg:Food"],"aliases":["substandard ghee"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:acetic-acid-ester","name":"Acetic acid ester","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":3,"article_count":3,"event_count":3,"article_ids":["0d14295d-a954-4163-8974-ecb51bd464e8","a45c3495-d077-4241-b1d7-72fa109d0e6b","ddada193-97b9-4ccc-8a51-bfbea77a0c06"],"ontology_types":["fflo:SyntheticAdulterant"],"aliases":["acetic acid ester"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:adulterated-oil","name":"Adulterated oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":3,"article_count":3,"event_count":3,"article_ids":["oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-9c21da748413e6f9"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["adulterated oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:beta-carotene","name":"Beta carotene","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":3,"article_count":3,"event_count":3,"article_ids":["0d14295d-a954-4163-8974-ecb51bd464e8","815dcb75-691c-4066-a898-b7ed46fdbdf2","dc0f107c-d6af-40f2-b8fd-d6a8264071a5"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant","fflo:SyntheticAdulterant"],"aliases":["beta carotene"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:beta-sitosterol","name":"Beta sitosterol","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":3,"article_count":3,"event_count":3,"article_ids":["adfa4015-b34e-4488-99e4-b20b4dc10324","bdc8358e-29a2-4efa-a99e-6023a27df35b","f25f2d19-18b4-4e7e-ad7b-8f30a193b3d6"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["beta sitosterol"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:essence","name":"Essence","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":3,"article_count":3,"event_count":3,"article_ids":["4fa075c9-a30f-47e5-8f09-158017bfd6d6","dab486f0-dfe1-46a8-b0d8-32e2a200b8e8","ed2c35d4-102a-4b73-8382-2ac35610faed"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant","fflo:SyntheticAdulterant"],"aliases":["essence"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:ghee-flavour","name":"Ghee flavour","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":3,"article_count":3,"event_count":3,"article_ids":["15f9d255-f348-4fb7-ba3d-003ab6adcfb2","550bda80-b5be-488a-89f6-64b9698b4033","ddada193-97b9-4ccc-8a51-bfbea77a0c06"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant","fflo:SyntheticAdulterant","fkg:Food"],"aliases":["ghee flavour"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:houseflies","name":"Houseflies","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":3,"article_count":3,"event_count":3,"article_ids":["508d009a-650f-4e40-b03d-ebef9d2c069e","9cbf8104-4fa2-4365-bc32-09eb2d1c9381","bf5cf44c-c3df-4c9c-b13b-8a0108b8a106"],"ontology_types":["fflo:ContaminantAdulterant"],"aliases":["houseflies"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:soybean-oil","name":"Soybean oil","definition":"Oil produced from soybean; spelling and refined-product variants are combined.","occurrences":3,"article_count":3,"event_count":3,"article_ids":["550bda80-b5be-488a-89f6-64b9698b4033","b556af30-b2db-4273-8b3b-a5b1ec113ebb","e6e7e00b-0ede-4741-8419-066a93e431cd"],"ontology_types":["fflo:NaturalAdulterant"],"aliases":["soybean oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:synthetic-essence","name":"Synthetic essence","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":3,"article_count":3,"event_count":3,"article_ids":["4f3026f8-7217-4bf9-af6e-71bcad8bb1c5","620bfde0-ec72-4b52-bfa4-e06ce3b56960","7ddc7283-670a-4dfb-9e38-a11aa0c579c2"],"ontology_types":["fflo:SyntheticAdulterant","fkg:Chemical"],"aliases":["synthetic essence"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:vanaspati-ghee","name":"Vanaspati ghee","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":3,"article_count":3,"event_count":3,"article_ids":["4d7063c6-5201-4ce1-89ed-75ee21d51b98","79f059b8-00b2-4345-ad46-440c7bc371df","a3aeeb23-ea47-454e-9079-05e2142e157d"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant","fflo:NaturalAdulterant","fkg:Food"],"aliases":["vanaspati ghee"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:vegetable-cooking-oil","name":"Vegetable cooking oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":3,"article_count":3,"event_count":3,"article_ids":["8187d86e-f46c-4e26-8188-a4e7b31de2f6","ea6c8861-7a39-4e19-8e71-58720131fa8d","eec20343-5ffa-486c-b431-59ca5e4568d4"],"ontology_types":["fflo:NaturalAdulterant","fso:EdibleOil"],"aliases":["vegetable cooking oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:vegetable-ghee","name":"Vegetable ghee","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":3,"article_count":3,"event_count":3,"article_ids":["15f9d255-f348-4fb7-ba3d-003ab6adcfb2","9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","b4a8aa1a-7262-4318-9579-9fff20f959a6"],"ontology_types":["fflo:NaturalAdulterant","fkg:Food"],"aliases":["vegetable ghee"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:duplicate-ghee","name":"Duplicate ghee","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","6f4adcf4-c63b-41c9-b7f6-0b0f4e75c857"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["duplicate ghee"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:expired-cooking-oil","name":"Expired cooking oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-97103cc7b062d80c"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["expired cooking oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:flavouring","name":"Flavouring","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["8187d86e-f46c-4e26-8188-a4e7b31de2f6","ea6c8861-7a39-4e19-8e71-58720131fa8d"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant","fflo:ChemicalAdulterant"],"aliases":["flavouring"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:flavouring-agents","name":"Flavouring agents","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["d301dc8a-7194-46ad-bf04-43efdc78c053","eec20343-5ffa-486c-b431-59ca5e4568d4"],"ontology_types":["fkg:Chemical","fso:FoodAdditive"],"aliases":["flavouring agents"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:foreign-fat","name":"Foreign fat","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["04c00967-a247-4802-b3c2-3f266885c385","fa1e38b4-4ced-4f4b-9a7b-b1b89ff13da7"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["foreign fat"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:harmful-substances","name":"Harmful substances","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["0ef4d3e4-844c-47ee-a430-8f171ec4c000","oil-077084a32a4e8faa"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["harmful substances"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:lactic-acid","name":"Lactic acid","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["0d14295d-a954-4163-8974-ecb51bd464e8","81b21166-1d16-4aec-910f-b382f9680f5f"],"ontology_types":["fflo:SyntheticAdulterant"],"aliases":["lactic acid"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:mono-glycerides","name":"Mono glycerides","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["0d14295d-a954-4163-8974-ecb51bd464e8","f24f8cd0-0ca1-49cf-8cf1-4a5e6b938fe3"],"ontology_types":["fflo:SyntheticAdulterant"],"aliases":["mono glycerides"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:soybean","name":"Soybean","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["4fa075c9-a30f-47e5-8f09-158017bfd6d6","9fe3b91d-3719-4260-926a-d5711bd1efc4"],"ontology_types":["fflo:NaturalAdulterant"],"aliases":["soybean"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:starch","name":"Starch","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["0109eea0-3adc-4177-a6f7-e3bc31bf237d","550bda80-b5be-488a-89f6-64b9698b4033"],"ontology_types":["fflo:NaturalAdulterant"],"aliases":["starch"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:sunflower-oil","name":"Sunflower oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["15f9d255-f348-4fb7-ba3d-003ab6adcfb2","oil-ff34df409a4806f1"],"ontology_types":["fflo:NaturalAdulterant","fkg:Food"],"aliases":["sunflower oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:synthetic-oils","name":"Synthetic oils","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["815dcb75-691c-4066-a898-b7ed46fdbdf2","dc0f107c-d6af-40f2-b8fd-d6a8264071a5"],"ontology_types":["fflo:SyntheticAdulterant"],"aliases":["synthetic oils"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:unidentified-oil","name":"Unidentified oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["43de8661-2844-46b7-bb39-15eb17f6b82e","4a021f95-539e-4217-98a0-d651be9a3b47"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant","fflo:NaturalAdulterant"],"aliases":["unidentified oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:vanaspati-oil","name":"Vanaspati oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["5710a503-9fbe-46ae-abd5-2663069b70db","cfa001c3-f0fc-45cd-8a71-3e35d2026e1f"],"ontology_types":["fflo:NaturalAdulterant"],"aliases":["vanaspati oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:acetic-acid","name":"Acetic acid","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["21fb2b00-9b86-4924-9a0d-248f976cfd93"],"ontology_types":["fflo:SyntheticAdulterant"],"aliases":["acetic acid"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:additives","name":"Additives","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["747400a0-bfad-4fa2-8004-06f237d1c543"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["additives"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:adulterants","name":"Adulterants","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["2b442757-da6a-46e5-ae37-b083e00062d3"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["adulterants"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:adulterated","name":"Adulterated","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["f1f602c9-64cd-4bfc-855c-fb8060a9c483"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["adulterated"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:adulterated-coconut-oil","name":"Adulterated coconut oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["adulterated coconut oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:adulterated-ingredients","name":"Adulterated ingredients","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["c6b3635d-7479-4594-9803-195c9d36f4a1"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["adulterated ingredients"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:adulterated-mustard-oil","name":"Adulterated mustard oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-f96a10806285c261"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["adulterated mustard oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:adulterated-variants","name":"Adulterated variants","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["3d6b98eb-c79e-460c-883b-9c997ffea009"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["adulterated variants"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:artificial-essence","name":"Artificial essence","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c"],"ontology_types":["fflo:SyntheticAdulterant"],"aliases":["artificial essence"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:artificial-flavors","name":"Artificial flavors","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["79f059b8-00b2-4345-ad46-440c7bc371df"],"ontology_types":["fflo:SyntheticAdulterant"],"aliases":["artificial flavors"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:artificial-flavourings","name":"Artificial flavourings","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["0109eea0-3adc-4177-a6f7-e3bc31bf237d"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["artificial flavourings"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:artificial-fragrances","name":"Artificial fragrances","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["394a5ff5-76f3-4885-87ed-4a6879611c22"],"ontology_types":["fflo:SyntheticAdulterant"],"aliases":["artificial fragrances"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:artificial-ghee","name":"Artificial ghee","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["473ed916-1979-4222-b1e8-38d39c51fe03"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["artificial ghee"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:artificial-ghee-essence","name":"Artificial ghee essence","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["0d14295d-a954-4163-8974-ecb51bd464e8"],"ontology_types":["fflo:SyntheticAdulterant"],"aliases":["artificial ghee essence"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:artificial-ghee-flavours","name":"Artificial ghee flavours","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["e57d61a5-e3ec-423d-ad96-243fbfae502b"],"ontology_types":["fflo:SyntheticAdulterant"],"aliases":["artificial ghee flavours"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:bathroom-chemicals","name":"Bathroom chemicals","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["b40ee428-0e50-4a51-aca9-a9074c0486cf"],"ontology_types":["fflo:SyntheticAdulterant"],"aliases":["bathroom chemicals"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:bathroom-cleaning-chemicals","name":"Bathroom cleaning chemicals","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["e70df749-9305-44b3-8a30-defc332a7fa4"],"ontology_types":["fflo:SyntheticAdulterant"],"aliases":["bathroom cleaning chemicals"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:beef-fat","name":"Beef fat","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["75eac450-5d76-45da-975a-a47f1515ca01"],"ontology_types":["fflo:NaturalAdulterant"],"aliases":["beef fat"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:beta-carotene","name":"Beta-carotene","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["73369c4a-c44b-4b7a-b3cc-07766ccb4e2a"],"ontology_types":["fflo:SyntheticAdulterant"],"aliases":["Beta-Carotene"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:beta-sitosterol","name":"Beta-sitosterol","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["81f9e1b1-71fd-45a2-9292-017420336059"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["beta-sitosterol"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:burnt-engine-oil","name":"Burnt engine oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["5710a503-9fbe-46ae-abd5-2663069b70db"],"ontology_types":["fflo:SyntheticAdulterant"],"aliases":["burnt engine oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:butter-flavour","name":"Butter flavour","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["1df33743-1016-49ce-981b-862125c0893f"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["butter flavour"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:carrot-extract","name":"Carrot extract","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["7855cb39-b177-4d3b-bd72-0a18afd5415b"],"ontology_types":["fflo:NaturalAdulterant"],"aliases":["carrot extract"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:cheap-fats","name":"Cheap fats","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["31cae76c-aa62-4328-bd40-368275f60e9f"],"ontology_types":["fflo:NaturalAdulterant"],"aliases":["cheap fats"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:chemical-flavouring-agents","name":"Chemical flavouring agents","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["ab7d0ab2-d774-415c-bd3f-a606f92ef3c3"],"ontology_types":["fflo:SyntheticAdulterant"],"aliases":["chemical flavouring agents"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:chemical-substances","name":"Chemical substances","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["29a173b3-4587-4257-9c93-2f0c483079c5"],"ontology_types":["fflo:SyntheticAdulterant"],"aliases":["chemical substances"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:chemical-based-flavoring-agents","name":"Chemical-based flavoring agents","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["4d7063c6-5201-4ce1-89ed-75ee21d51b98"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["chemical-based flavoring agents"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:chemically-manufactured-substance","name":"Chemically manufactured substance","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["83bf777b-6ee5-4e82-bd85-6e374853473a"],"ontology_types":["fflo:SyntheticAdulterant"],"aliases":["chemically manufactured substance"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:cleaning-substances","name":"Cleaning substances","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["a9c15856-f188-45d4-80a8-7929118af59a"],"ontology_types":["fflo:SyntheticAdulterant"],"aliases":["cleaning substances"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:colgate","name":"Colgate","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["d18985ea-8239-498e-9147-eda1d0bb8bde"],"ontology_types":["fflo:SyntheticAdulterant"],"aliases":["Colgate"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:coloring-agents","name":"Coloring agents","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["ea6c8861-7a39-4e19-8e71-58720131fa8d"],"ontology_types":["fflo:ChemicalAdulterant"],"aliases":["coloring agents"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:counterfeit-ghee","name":"Counterfeit ghee","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["0a23e582-3dac-4091-bf36-a08d511a3763"],"ontology_types":["fkg:Adulterant"],"aliases":["counterfeit ghee"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:counterfeit-saras-ghee","name":"Counterfeit saras ghee","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["f5653eaf-7d13-4c91-93c7-e30daca2ec3a"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["counterfeit Saras ghee"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:dabur-toothpaste","name":"Dabur toothpaste","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["d18985ea-8239-498e-9147-eda1d0bb8bde"],"ontology_types":["fflo:SyntheticAdulterant"],"aliases":["Dabur toothpaste"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:dalda-cooking-oil","name":"Dalda cooking oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["2ad1f047-985c-4c59-aa13-749fa75bcba9"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["Dalda cooking oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:dangerous-chemicals","name":"Dangerous chemicals","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["5710a503-9fbe-46ae-abd5-2663069b70db"],"ontology_types":["fflo:SyntheticAdulterant"],"aliases":["dangerous chemicals"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:edible-oil","name":"Edible oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["36a70fc6-de5a-494c-9dc5-801fe7a7a53d"],"ontology_types":["fflo:NaturalAdulterant"],"aliases":["edible oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:expired-ghee","name":"Expired ghee","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["f62defd3-7975-4edf-8f34-40a36b487ac8"],"ontology_types":["fkg:Food"],"aliases":["expired ghee"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:fake-coconut-oil","name":"Fake coconut oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["fake coconut oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:fake-cooking-oil","name":"Fake cooking oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-0d7b13a282f9b466"],"ontology_types":["fflo:AdulteratedProduct"],"aliases":["fake cooking oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:flavouring-essence","name":"Flavouring essence","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["4216dab3-b436-422a-a6ee-74b5858f7aa2"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["flavouring essence"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:flower-oil","name":"Flower oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["a18ba308-f8ab-4590-b466-daf80aa2b59c"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["flower oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:foul-smelling-ghee","name":"Foul-smelling ghee","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["e1bbca7c-14db-40cf-a128-0219f12466a3"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["foul-smelling ghee"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:ghee-essence","name":"Ghee essence","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["ab7d0ab2-d774-415c-bd3f-a606f92ef3c3"],"ontology_types":["fflo:SyntheticAdulterant"],"aliases":["ghee essence"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:ghee-flavor","name":"Ghee flavor","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["73369c4a-c44b-4b7a-b3cc-07766ccb4e2a"],"ontology_types":["fflo:SyntheticAdulterant"],"aliases":["ghee flavor"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:ghee-from-sri-vyshnavi-dairy-specialties","name":"Ghee from sri vyshnavi dairy specialties","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["caae3943-065a-475a-a6fe-f5706ce3db97"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["ghee from Sri Vyshnavi Dairy Specialties"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:ghee-like-substance","name":"Ghee like substance","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["473ed916-1979-4222-b1e8-38d39c51fe03"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["ghee like substance"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:groundnut-oil","name":"Groundnut oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["2ad1f047-985c-4c59-aa13-749fa75bcba9"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["groundnut oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:hazardous-chemicals","name":"Hazardous chemicals","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["91aa9ca8-e7d7-4036-a22f-5c8c8e7fc2ce"],"ontology_types":["fflo:SyntheticAdulterant"],"aliases":["hazardous chemicals"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:houseflies-and-mosquitoes","name":"Houseflies and mosquitoes","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["df6dd614-6785-4c3a-b6c7-1e091a751c64"],"ontology_types":["fflo:ContaminantAdulterant"],"aliases":["houseflies and mosquitoes"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:hydrogenated-vegetable-oil","name":"Hydrogenated vegetable oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["eb84cbb3-24d1-4565-9ec1-8bd3b9d4bec9"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["hydrogenated vegetable oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:impure-edible-oil","name":"Impure edible oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-5ac9372e2a178a90"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["impure edible oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:impure-substances","name":"Impure substances","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["9d92713b-a9c4-4b7e-87f4-c4fd443e38b5"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["impure substances"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:inferior-and-adulterated-oils","name":"Inferior and adulterated oils","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-a882a3e8b7aeb487"],"ontology_types":["fkg:Adulterant"],"aliases":["inferior and adulterated oils"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:interesterified-vegetable-fat","name":"Interesterified vegetable fat","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["9fe3b91d-3719-4260-926a-d5711bd1efc4"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["interesterified vegetable fat"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:lal-dant-manjan","name":"Lal dant manjan","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["d18985ea-8239-498e-9147-eda1d0bb8bde"],"ontology_types":["fflo:SyntheticAdulterant"],"aliases":["Lal Dant Manjan"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:lethal-chemicals","name":"Lethal chemicals","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["b4b614f7-a43d-4e57-9766-25f7fef90d68"],"ontology_types":["fflo:SyntheticAdulterant"],"aliases":["lethal chemicals"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:life-threatening-chemicals","name":"Life-threatening chemicals","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["e1955bc5-123d-4ca0-b875-2d75b1f718f1"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["life-threatening chemicals"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:loose-ghee","name":"Loose ghee","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["a06cd968-9dc5-42c5-a6e8-3d3c36dfc8c2"],"ontology_types":["fkg:Food"],"aliases":["loose ghee"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:low-quality-edible-oil","name":"Low quality edible oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["fdc662ec-5ed7-4d04-8993-6144ff01abc2"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["low quality edible oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:low-grade-edible-oils","name":"Low-grade edible oils","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["502ff9a1-ac00-4ef2-96cb-0a0614085766"],"ontology_types":["fflo:NaturalAdulterant"],"aliases":["low-grade edible oils"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:low-grade-vanaspati-ghee","name":"Low-grade vanaspati ghee","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["d301dc8a-7194-46ad-bf04-43efdc78c053"],"ontology_types":["fkg:Food"],"aliases":["low-grade vanaspati ghee"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:low-quality-ghee","name":"Low-quality ghee","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["301bb818-ff44-4346-9ffe-ad58bf13cfb2"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["low-quality ghee"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:low-quality-products","name":"Low-quality products","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["ea51c75b-4b85-48fb-bbb7-8fde23c110aa"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["low-quality products"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:miscible-oil","name":"Miscible oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-d7ec006e22e070de"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["miscible oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:mislabelled-as-vegetable-oil","name":"Mislabelled as vegetable oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["62bc0e3c-1d90-4688-bc1b-e00f620c5c8c"],"ontology_types":["fflo:AdulterationMethod"],"aliases":["mislabelled as vegetable oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:mono-glycerides","name":"Mono-glycerides","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["81b21166-1d16-4aec-910f-b382f9680f5f"],"ontology_types":["fflo:SyntheticAdulterant"],"aliases":["mono-glycerides"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:mosquitoes-and-houseflies","name":"Mosquitoes and houseflies","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["0d96e6b1-57f6-4555-8711-703a6c818eea"],"ontology_types":["fflo:ContaminantAdulterant"],"aliases":["mosquitoes and houseflies"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:old-oil","name":"Old oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-85127f0bde3109d3"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["old oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:petroleum-jelly","name":"Petroleum jelly","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["8d8b9ba9-5da4-4861-89db-348400c8ef68"],"ontology_types":["fflo:SyntheticAdulterant"],"aliases":["petroleum jelly"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:pig-fat","name":"Pig fat","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["75eac450-5d76-45da-975a-a47f1515ca01"],"ontology_types":["fflo:NaturalAdulterant"],"aliases":["pig fat"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:plant-oils","name":"Plant oils","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["e70df749-9305-44b3-8a30-defc332a7fa4"],"ontology_types":["fflo:NaturalAdulterant"],"aliases":["plant oils"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:potato","name":"Potato","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["550bda80-b5be-488a-89f6-64b9698b4033"],"ontology_types":["fflo:NaturalAdulterant"],"aliases":["potato"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:preservatives","name":"Preservatives","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["920f5e05-04f9-4545-b26d-ea48a1f18a2f"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["preservatives"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:procured-ghee","name":"Procured ghee","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["4c67d899-fab5-4e78-9274-526d6a4fe0bb"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["procured ghee"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:refined-soybean-oil","name":"Refined soybean oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["4f3026f8-7217-4bf9-af6e-71bcad8bb1c5"],"ontology_types":["fflo:NaturalAdulterant"],"aliases":["refined soybean oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:refined-vegetable-oil","name":"Refined vegetable oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["85680853-3899-4f21-b262-dbe3e8893779"],"ontology_types":["fflo:NaturalAdulterant"],"aliases":["refined vegetable oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:reused-cooking-oil","name":"Reused cooking oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-af3a540365afc7c2"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["reused cooking oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:reused-tin-containers","name":"Reused tin containers","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-e1cd585e16b9635b"],"ontology_types":["fkg:PackagingMaterial"],"aliases":["reused tin containers"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:scent","name":"Scent","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["0aa842b8-1ac9-4243-a8b6-5d98d32d6089"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["scent"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:special-type-of-chemical","name":"Special type of chemical","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["2fede3c0-46a7-46e8-a776-5a6fd6d3f08e"],"ontology_types":["fflo:SyntheticAdulterant"],"aliases":["special type of chemical"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:spurious-milk-products","name":"Spurious milk products","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["9379cea2-647c-459b-af54-770e31e9bbe1"],"ontology_types":["fflo:AdulteratedFood"],"aliases":["spurious milk products"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:spurious-oil","name":"Spurious oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["spurious oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:spurious-types-of-oils","name":"Spurious types of oils","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["8ecfae6d-fb77-4dfe-9f9b-f1425d8a13da"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["spurious types of oils"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:sub-standard-raw-material","name":"Sub-standard raw material","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["23a5dd2a-a53c-44b8-8b86-37e04d4cf1ee"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["sub-standard raw material"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:substandard","name":"Substandard","definition":"The product is reported as failing a quality, composition, or safety requirement.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["b55fc156-b5e6-49b6-b4f1-e092d3b4f553"],"ontology_types":["fkg:Adulterant"],"aliases":["substandard"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:substandard-products","name":"Substandard products","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["526515f5-4a82-4b0b-9e1c-7f3a2aa4cde4"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["substandard products"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:suspicious-samples","name":"Suspicious samples","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-daf4ca29b4849989"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["suspicious samples"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:synthetic-color","name":"Synthetic color","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["4d7063c6-5201-4ce1-89ed-75ee21d51b98"],"ontology_types":["fflo:SyntheticAdulterant"],"aliases":["synthetic color"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:synthetic-essence-of-ghee","name":"Synthetic essence of ghee","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["b556af30-b2db-4273-8b3b-a5b1ec113ebb"],"ontology_types":["fflo:SyntheticAdulterant"],"aliases":["synthetic essence of ghee"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:synthetic-fake-ghee","name":"Synthetic fake ghee","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["cf35dad3-c846-4c5e-91db-577efd256f78"],"ontology_types":["fflo:SyntheticAdulterant"],"aliases":["synthetic fake ghee"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:synthetic-material","name":"Synthetic material","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["0af3703f-23ec-4f8f-a1b6-45b4adb68b12"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["synthetic material"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:synthetic-substance","name":"Synthetic substance","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["b4b614f7-a43d-4e57-9766-25f7fef90d68"],"ontology_types":["fflo:SyntheticAdulterant"],"aliases":["synthetic substance"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:testa-oil","name":"Testa oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2"],"ontology_types":["fflo:NaturalAdulterant"],"aliases":["testa oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:total-polar-materials","name":"Total polar materials","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba"],"ontology_types":["fflo:ContaminantAdulterant"],"aliases":["total polar materials"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:unfit-edible-oil","name":"Unfit edible oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-2f0a177eecae442b"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["unfit edible oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:unlabeled","name":"Unlabeled","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["94faca18-b471-4748-8bab-f399641cedbd"],"ontology_types":["fflo:AdulterationMethod"],"aliases":["unlabeled"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:unsafe-substances","name":"Unsafe substances","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["d301dc8a-7194-46ad-bf04-43efdc78c053"],"ontology_types":["fkg:Chemical"],"aliases":["unsafe substances"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:vegetable-butter","name":"Vegetable butter","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c"],"ontology_types":["fflo:NaturalAdulterant"],"aliases":["vegetable butter"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:degraded-fake-or-unspecified-product:vegetable-refined-oil","name":"Vegetable refined oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["1df33743-1016-49ce-981b-862125c0893f"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["vegetable refined oil"]}]},{"id":"adulterants:group:substitute-oils-and-fats","name":"Substitute oils and fats","definition":"Lower-value, undeclared, or non-food oils and fats reported as substitutes.","occurrences":131,"article_count":120,"event_count":120,"article_ids":["0109eea0-3adc-4177-a6f7-e3bc31bf237d","0a342064-5378-4aff-b4aa-34ae5c1ab66b","0d14295d-a954-4163-8974-ecb51bd464e8","102a4953-33a2-4842-827e-987e3bb6ce7a","141518ef-ce68-4969-bb2a-66f56733fab2","164f43df-a069-4197-9854-e7bd9fc78fae","1a87f314-ec7e-4407-96f2-0995e8d26fc0","1b1069d2-3f50-4dd3-a8bd-0aeed6bacf98","1e6b9f5b-a065-4242-ae58-1f105455955f","1fe9639d-5c39-472e-94a7-73ac2b03bfce","2010c6e2-c9cb-4a3e-b22b-8cabf1044074","2013c452-d1c8-41a0-abea-92e26d231790","21fb2b00-9b86-4924-9a0d-248f976cfd93","22261df7-8974-447f-a1cf-192c59528f64","2255e304-d6ef-4707-b594-cbc3955019ec","28a03096-e60c-4adb-b4fa-55f0bd28a95d","2d8a95d1-8554-4194-b427-4239c3f9ad5b","301bb818-ff44-4346-9ffe-ad58bf13cfb2","31cae76c-aa62-4328-bd40-368275f60e9f","3278338f-1fa0-4045-9701-e237d5ad0930","32bc8e29-1313-4d9b-86ff-8c3bb665f057","33326887-4ed0-4562-a0ac-b889d6ad53a9","34dc1c1f-d12c-4230-bb1c-e41b6961f288","3c0e9d23-f858-47eb-8e7a-23db1d42822a","3d6b98eb-c79e-460c-883b-9c997ffea009","3e325b99-7611-4f89-8963-7f79c5ac4105","3f674523-5416-4b89-8cab-fe3ddf3c9e7e","4216dab3-b436-422a-a6ee-74b5858f7aa2","4974f73f-37bc-4300-8d31-d97ca337365b","4a638904-2bcf-4037-8afd-ec6e5b0b6b11","4cd73621-691c-4866-91c1-0b99d0d1a89a","4eb18b90-e310-48db-9531-68b146420749","54686005-b842-4cc5-82b1-0276e36a42b6","550bda80-b5be-488a-89f6-64b9698b4033","554708da-6872-4a1b-91cc-3beeb59fbf2e","55552c00-e696-4ac2-951e-156364cb1337","5710a503-9fbe-46ae-abd5-2663069b70db","57b2326c-e877-4995-82fc-221eda139718","590fff58-7ba9-4a5b-8232-4c27d67f13b1","5a7bde0b-59e0-4f86-9b63-2bbebb593d41","5d222c9b-8733-4d3b-abaa-59f77da35546","5f6c5fd0-a2f8-4bfe-9ac4-a8d06bc8640a","5fa4530c-d60b-48c1-b6b2-371abff6d77a","620bfde0-ec72-4b52-bfa4-e06ce3b56960","6721b632-2b4f-492a-840d-bb05d2a9f1af","672ecfdb-cb9d-485d-8fc1-76e6a8269fe7","6ee56cf3-78f2-4420-bede-08f76397b2fb","73066633-67a8-4240-8c5a-3c4ae29b486d","73369c4a-c44b-4b7a-b3cc-07766ccb4e2a","75eac450-5d76-45da-975a-a47f1515ca01","75f7eb04-35fe-48ce-af4a-d0ccf3067076","7855cb39-b177-4d3b-bd72-0a18afd5415b","7a707681-5edc-461c-b5a8-0057a374f3cc","7b3b345d-0902-4461-a6bc-747c26feb7f2","824601ea-5309-4ddf-bc61-486c992e309c","835cbabf-d424-4f04-89cb-1d8c0b08f1ab","83bf777b-6ee5-4e82-bd85-6e374853473a","867c2a12-155a-4309-aff0-300c6125824c","892c7a97-bb6b-47a5-9402-8a5293acf25b","8d8b9ba9-5da4-4861-89db-348400c8ef68","8e4f2f4a-8039-4ba0-9b6d-beecad106136","8ecfae6d-fb77-4dfe-9f9b-f1425d8a13da","9285d418-e4e3-40a1-b1d1-da857748bfd3","93c87fee-61ec-4ea8-bd4f-3434669835ee","93ec7040-a06c-4da5-b0b1-626399456a8a","9c74f902-2ef0-4269-b436-acc19aa11ea5","9c81b00b-87e1-4cce-bfc8-9583b3b8a234","9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","a18ba308-f8ab-4590-b466-daf80aa2b59c","a3ce7cd2-ee71-42ce-b4f7-96a81c6bd295","a6385d09-ca9d-4f95-b5ba-4f50630bec35","ab7d0ab2-d774-415c-bd3f-a606f92ef3c3","b293dea5-f7e1-4889-a56d-f823569cdff4","b4a8aa1a-7262-4318-9579-9fff20f959a6","b556af30-b2db-4273-8b3b-a5b1ec113ebb","b5940660-7f58-4123-bb25-6f78d4e1694d","b78601e1-6600-408f-bc8c-52407a676ecb","c0981bc0-6d81-46d5-a2fc-715c6a5662b8","c2853c18-cc20-43b6-bd36-3b77725ba1d7","c349f006-e1f4-498e-970a-626a724e2231","c5597192-fe4a-479a-8bf7-cdcf15d74d10","c7af7c66-9a6d-42c8-8695-bcd164ed856b","c8ddee14-df38-49aa-9d85-a7c6b34273a6","cbdf7850-c12b-44e7-9a2a-2e88994f389f","cf1f664f-fab8-46ef-9768-c3fc897d3913","d156577c-5001-4f1b-90f7-d7b21a37497b","d2c92cf6-2a73-4e89-adff-db3cb523f8e1","d315d00d-a3eb-4c0f-9554-c1395585910f","d405b9b8-3fd3-4230-a3d3-ccdd34abd185","d5ff3294-0ecd-48eb-b9dd-a2c0282a055a","d6f9dd1e-cee9-48ff-a7e7-71d7a7b8f61d","d7c49d74-0c9c-470b-94ad-c7ccaa111eaf","dab486f0-dfe1-46a8-b0d8-32e2a200b8e8","db8eb9e3-f6e6-4be4-b6d2-d135a6c3e9ac","e06bafea-36a4-40ac-8e47-2a2619fd46fd","e1955bc5-123d-4ca0-b875-2d75b1f718f1","e256486b-ee32-4d0f-9cba-d02bf4bd780a","e446ef0a-2a74-42bf-bcd6-2b793506650e","e6d36e44-00e2-4f9e-95b1-e892e44117eb","ea0bba2c-7a56-40f2-afac-00f638b54fc3","ea51c75b-4b85-48fb-bbb7-8fde23c110aa","ed2c35d4-102a-4b73-8382-2ac35610faed","eec20343-5ffa-486c-b431-59ca5e4568d4","f1307eae-cbfb-4f04-b6cc-3facd9e296d6","f289c668-0c40-41e6-82af-ae6829b262d4","fe4e9bc0-2802-4dd8-97e4-27704fad2a1b","oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-846611108e27fafb","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-ff34df409a4806f1"],"entries":[{"id":"adulterants:entry:substitute-oils-and-fats:palm-oil-or-palm-olein","name":"Palm oil or palm olein","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 11 extracted labels.","occurrences":66,"article_count":60,"event_count":60,"article_ids":["0d14295d-a954-4163-8974-ecb51bd464e8","1b1069d2-3f50-4dd3-a8bd-0aeed6bacf98","1e6b9f5b-a065-4242-ae58-1f105455955f","1fe9639d-5c39-472e-94a7-73ac2b03bfce","2010c6e2-c9cb-4a3e-b22b-8cabf1044074","2013c452-d1c8-41a0-abea-92e26d231790","21fb2b00-9b86-4924-9a0d-248f976cfd93","2255e304-d6ef-4707-b594-cbc3955019ec","28a03096-e60c-4adb-b4fa-55f0bd28a95d","2d8a95d1-8554-4194-b427-4239c3f9ad5b","301bb818-ff44-4346-9ffe-ad58bf13cfb2","31cae76c-aa62-4328-bd40-368275f60e9f","3278338f-1fa0-4045-9701-e237d5ad0930","33326887-4ed0-4562-a0ac-b889d6ad53a9","34dc1c1f-d12c-4230-bb1c-e41b6961f288","3c0e9d23-f858-47eb-8e7a-23db1d42822a","3d6b98eb-c79e-460c-883b-9c997ffea009","3e325b99-7611-4f89-8963-7f79c5ac4105","4216dab3-b436-422a-a6ee-74b5858f7aa2","4a638904-2bcf-4037-8afd-ec6e5b0b6b11","550bda80-b5be-488a-89f6-64b9698b4033","55552c00-e696-4ac2-951e-156364cb1337","5710a503-9fbe-46ae-abd5-2663069b70db","57b2326c-e877-4995-82fc-221eda139718","5a7bde0b-59e0-4f86-9b63-2bbebb593d41","5d222c9b-8733-4d3b-abaa-59f77da35546","5f6c5fd0-a2f8-4bfe-9ac4-a8d06bc8640a","620bfde0-ec72-4b52-bfa4-e06ce3b56960","672ecfdb-cb9d-485d-8fc1-76e6a8269fe7","7855cb39-b177-4d3b-bd72-0a18afd5415b","824601ea-5309-4ddf-bc61-486c992e309c","9c74f902-2ef0-4269-b436-acc19aa11ea5","9c81b00b-87e1-4cce-bfc8-9583b3b8a234","9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","a18ba308-f8ab-4590-b466-daf80aa2b59c","a3ce7cd2-ee71-42ce-b4f7-96a81c6bd295","a6385d09-ca9d-4f95-b5ba-4f50630bec35","ab7d0ab2-d774-415c-bd3f-a606f92ef3c3","b293dea5-f7e1-4889-a56d-f823569cdff4","b4a8aa1a-7262-4318-9579-9fff20f959a6","b556af30-b2db-4273-8b3b-a5b1ec113ebb","b5940660-7f58-4123-bb25-6f78d4e1694d","c349f006-e1f4-498e-970a-626a724e2231","c8ddee14-df38-49aa-9d85-a7c6b34273a6","d7c49d74-0c9c-470b-94ad-c7ccaa111eaf","dab486f0-dfe1-46a8-b0d8-32e2a200b8e8","e6d36e44-00e2-4f9e-95b1-e892e44117eb","ea0bba2c-7a56-40f2-afac-00f638b54fc3","ea51c75b-4b85-48fb-bbb7-8fde23c110aa","ed2c35d4-102a-4b73-8382-2ac35610faed","eec20343-5ffa-486c-b431-59ca5e4568d4","f1307eae-cbfb-4f04-b6cc-3facd9e296d6","f289c668-0c40-41e6-82af-ae6829b262d4","oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-ff34df409a4806f1"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant","fflo:NaturalAdulterant","fflo:SyntheticAdulterant","fkg:Food","fso:EdibleOil"],"aliases":["chemical-based palm oil derivatives","coconut and palm oil","low-grade palm oil","palm kernel oil","palm oil","palm stearin","palmolein","palmolein oil","palmoline oil","refined palm oil","refined palm olein"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:substitute-oils-and-fats:animal-fat","name":"Animal fat","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 2 extracted labels.","occurrences":58,"article_count":58,"event_count":58,"article_ids":["0109eea0-3adc-4177-a6f7-e3bc31bf237d","0a342064-5378-4aff-b4aa-34ae5c1ab66b","102a4953-33a2-4842-827e-987e3bb6ce7a","141518ef-ce68-4969-bb2a-66f56733fab2","164f43df-a069-4197-9854-e7bd9fc78fae","1a87f314-ec7e-4407-96f2-0995e8d26fc0","2010c6e2-c9cb-4a3e-b22b-8cabf1044074","22261df7-8974-447f-a1cf-192c59528f64","32bc8e29-1313-4d9b-86ff-8c3bb665f057","3f674523-5416-4b89-8cab-fe3ddf3c9e7e","4974f73f-37bc-4300-8d31-d97ca337365b","4cd73621-691c-4866-91c1-0b99d0d1a89a","4eb18b90-e310-48db-9531-68b146420749","54686005-b842-4cc5-82b1-0276e36a42b6","554708da-6872-4a1b-91cc-3beeb59fbf2e","55552c00-e696-4ac2-951e-156364cb1337","590fff58-7ba9-4a5b-8232-4c27d67f13b1","5fa4530c-d60b-48c1-b6b2-371abff6d77a","620bfde0-ec72-4b52-bfa4-e06ce3b56960","6721b632-2b4f-492a-840d-bb05d2a9f1af","6ee56cf3-78f2-4420-bede-08f76397b2fb","73066633-67a8-4240-8c5a-3c4ae29b486d","73369c4a-c44b-4b7a-b3cc-07766ccb4e2a","75eac450-5d76-45da-975a-a47f1515ca01","75f7eb04-35fe-48ce-af4a-d0ccf3067076","7a707681-5edc-461c-b5a8-0057a374f3cc","7b3b345d-0902-4461-a6bc-747c26feb7f2","835cbabf-d424-4f04-89cb-1d8c0b08f1ab","83bf777b-6ee5-4e82-bd85-6e374853473a","867c2a12-155a-4309-aff0-300c6125824c","892c7a97-bb6b-47a5-9402-8a5293acf25b","8d8b9ba9-5da4-4861-89db-348400c8ef68","8e4f2f4a-8039-4ba0-9b6d-beecad106136","8ecfae6d-fb77-4dfe-9f9b-f1425d8a13da","9285d418-e4e3-40a1-b1d1-da857748bfd3","93c87fee-61ec-4ea8-bd4f-3434669835ee","93ec7040-a06c-4da5-b0b1-626399456a8a","a3ce7cd2-ee71-42ce-b4f7-96a81c6bd295","b78601e1-6600-408f-bc8c-52407a676ecb","c0981bc0-6d81-46d5-a2fc-715c6a5662b8","c2853c18-cc20-43b6-bd36-3b77725ba1d7","c5597192-fe4a-479a-8bf7-cdcf15d74d10","c7af7c66-9a6d-42c8-8695-bcd164ed856b","cbdf7850-c12b-44e7-9a2a-2e88994f389f","cf1f664f-fab8-46ef-9768-c3fc897d3913","d156577c-5001-4f1b-90f7-d7b21a37497b","d2c92cf6-2a73-4e89-adff-db3cb523f8e1","d315d00d-a3eb-4c0f-9554-c1395585910f","d405b9b8-3fd3-4230-a3d3-ccdd34abd185","d5ff3294-0ecd-48eb-b9dd-a2c0282a055a","d6f9dd1e-cee9-48ff-a7e7-71d7a7b8f61d","db8eb9e3-f6e6-4be4-b6d2-d135a6c3e9ac","e06bafea-36a4-40ac-8e47-2a2619fd46fd","e1955bc5-123d-4ca0-b875-2d75b1f718f1","e256486b-ee32-4d0f-9cba-d02bf4bd780a","e446ef0a-2a74-42bf-bcd6-2b793506650e","fe4e9bc0-2802-4dd8-97e4-27704fad2a1b","oil-077084a32a4e8faa"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant","fflo:AnimalFat","fflo:NaturalAdulterant","fkg:Substance"],"aliases":["animal fat","animal fats"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:substitute-oils-and-fats:lower-grade-or-unspecified-oil","name":"Lower-grade or unspecified oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 3 extracted labels.","occurrences":3,"article_count":3,"event_count":3,"article_ids":["oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502"],"ontology_types":["fflo:NaturalAdulterant","fkg:Food"],"aliases":["cheaper brands","local oil","other oils"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:substitute-oils-and-fats:rice-bran-oil","name":"Rice bran oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3"],"ontology_types":["fflo:NaturalAdulterant"],"aliases":["rice bran oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:substitute-oils-and-fats:condensate-oil","name":"Condensate oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-9790eee6e00c0018"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["condensate oil"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:substitute-oils-and-fats:used-motor-oil","name":"Used motor oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-846611108e27fafb"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["used motor oil"]}]},{"id":"adulterants:group:chemicals-additives-and-quality-indicators","name":"Chemicals, additives, and quality indicators","definition":"Chemical substances, additives, or measured quality indicators reported in connection with the issue.","occurrences":16,"article_count":16,"event_count":16,"article_ids":["0ea7c6a7-d2c1-498f-aa00-f3fc942206ed","15f9d255-f348-4fb7-ba3d-003ab6adcfb2","8187d86e-f46c-4e26-8188-a4e7b31de2f6","a3aeeb23-ea47-454e-9079-05e2142e157d","b3e58970-8bf0-4e37-a8f9-dd4fce60bf46","c8ddee14-df38-49aa-9d85-a7c6b34273a6","d301dc8a-7194-46ad-bf04-43efdc78c053","dab486f0-dfe1-46a8-b0d8-32e2a200b8e8","ed2c35d4-102a-4b73-8382-2ac35610faed","eec20343-5ffa-486c-b431-59ca5e4568d4","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"entries":[{"id":"adulterants:entry:chemicals-additives-and-quality-indicators:colour","name":"Colour","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["dab486f0-dfe1-46a8-b0d8-32e2a200b8e8","ed2c35d4-102a-4b73-8382-2ac35610faed"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant","fflo:SyntheticAdulterant"],"aliases":["colour"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:chemicals-additives-and-quality-indicators:synthetic-colours","name":"Synthetic colours","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["a3aeeb23-ea47-454e-9079-05e2142e157d","d301dc8a-7194-46ad-bf04-43efdc78c053"],"ontology_types":["fflo:SyntheticAdulterant","fkg:Chemical"],"aliases":["synthetic colours"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:chemicals-additives-and-quality-indicators:vitamin-d","name":"Vitamin d","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["Vitamin D"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:chemicals-additives-and-quality-indicators:colouring","name":"Colouring","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["eec20343-5ffa-486c-b431-59ca5e4568d4"],"ontology_types":["fso:FoodAdditive"],"aliases":["colouring"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:chemicals-additives-and-quality-indicators:colouring-agents","name":"Colouring agents","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["8187d86e-f46c-4e26-8188-a4e7b31de2f6"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant"],"aliases":["colouring agents"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:chemicals-additives-and-quality-indicators:colouring-material","name":"Colouring material","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-898a1362002b727d"],"ontology_types":["fkg:Substance"],"aliases":["colouring material"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:chemicals-additives-and-quality-indicators:colouring-powders","name":"Colouring powders","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["0ea7c6a7-d2c1-498f-aa00-f3fc942206ed"],"ontology_types":["fflo:SyntheticAdulterant"],"aliases":["colouring powders"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:chemicals-additives-and-quality-indicators:oil-coloured-with-turmeric","name":"Oil coloured with turmeric","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["b3e58970-8bf0-4e37-a8f9-dd4fce60bf46"],"ontology_types":["fflo:NaturalAdulterant"],"aliases":["oil coloured with turmeric"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:chemicals-additives-and-quality-indicators:sulphur","name":"Sulphur","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-b96369f55af40397"],"ontology_types":["fkg:Chemical"],"aliases":["sulphur"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:chemicals-additives-and-quality-indicators:total-polar-compound","name":"Total polar compound","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff"],"ontology_types":["fflo:ContaminantAdulterant"],"aliases":["Total Polar Compound"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:chemicals-additives-and-quality-indicators:total-polar-compounds","name":"Total polar compounds","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5"],"ontology_types":["fflo:ContaminantAdulterant"],"aliases":["Total Polar Compounds"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:chemicals-additives-and-quality-indicators:yellow-chemical-colour","name":"Yellow chemical colour","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["c8ddee14-df38-49aa-9d85-a7c6b34273a6"],"ontology_types":["fflo:SyntheticAdulterant"],"aliases":["yellow chemical colour"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:chemicals-additives-and-quality-indicators:yellow-colour","name":"Yellow colour","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["15f9d255-f348-4fb7-ba3d-003ab6adcfb2"],"ontology_types":["fkg:Food"],"aliases":["yellow colour"]}]},{"id":"adulterants:group:physical-contaminants","name":"Physical contaminants","definition":"Foreign physical material reported in the food product.","occurrences":7,"article_count":5,"event_count":5,"article_ids":["bcd183c8-344e-4cb8-8561-8c2e6a027897","cddf4a6a-4d4e-4d8b-9631-734b807f7215","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-7ced813eb9eb1314"],"entries":[{"id":"adulterants:entry:physical-contaminants:animal-carcass-residues","name":"Animal carcass residues","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["bcd183c8-344e-4cb8-8561-8c2e6a027897","cddf4a6a-4d4e-4d8b-9631-734b807f7215"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Adulterant","fflo:ContaminantAdulterant"],"aliases":["animal carcass residues"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:physical-contaminants:dust","name":"Dust","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559"],"ontology_types":["fflo:ContaminantAdulterant"],"aliases":["dust"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:physical-contaminants:animal-carcasses","name":"Animal carcasses","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-7ced813eb9eb1314"],"ontology_types":["fflo:NaturalAdulterant"],"aliases":["animal carcasses"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:physical-contaminants:mud","name":"Mud","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-0db512df7c0cc7df"],"ontology_types":["fflo:ContaminantAdulterant"],"aliases":["mud"]},{"id":"adulterants:entry:physical-contaminants:sand","name":"Sand","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559"],"ontology_types":["fflo:ContaminantAdulterant"],"aliases":["sand"]}]},{"id":"adulterants:group:toxic-seeds-and-plant-oils","name":"Toxic seeds and plant oils","definition":"Named toxic botanical materials or oils reported as adulterants.","occurrences":5,"article_count":5,"event_count":5,"article_ids":["oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-e1aa62675070cacd"],"entries":[{"id":"adulterants:entry:toxic-seeds-and-plant-oils:argemone-seed-or-oil","name":"Argemone seed or oil","definition":"A normalized adulterants and reported materials concept combining 5 extracted labels.","occurrences":5,"article_count":5,"event_count":5,"article_ids":["oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-e1aa62675070cacd"],"ontology_types":["fflo:NaturalAdulterant"],"aliases":["argemone","Argemone mexicana","Argemone mexicana seed oil","argemone mexicana seeds","Argemone oil"]}]}]},{"id":"claim_statuses","label":"Claim status","description":"How strongly the article presents the event claim, kept separate from relevance.","groups":[{"id":"claim_statuses:group:unconfirmed-or-qualified-finding","name":"Unconfirmed or qualified finding","definition":"Suspected, alleged, pending, or otherwise unresolved claims.","occurrences":583,"article_count":534,"event_count":583,"article_ids":["008cc0e4-d7d7-475f-80d8-d81621e7b862","0109eea0-3adc-4177-a6f7-e3bc31bf237d","030df41e-ccfc-4023-a026-89cc92bf3253","03ea9124-befd-4983-bcdc-147e3ed3bf73","04c00967-a247-4802-b3c2-3f266885c385","05375704-5b45-4e0a-b388-9944c0c5fc9f","05937ca4-de64-422f-ba56-878f6152027c","0932679a-fe82-4a1e-949e-9d4fd17ed2a0","0a113e2a-26d3-45e4-9064-7cfa2f39230b","0a23e582-3dac-4091-bf36-a08d511a3763","0a342064-5378-4aff-b4aa-34ae5c1ab66b","0aa842b8-1ac9-4243-a8b6-5d98d32d6089","0af3703f-23ec-4f8f-a1b6-45b4adb68b12","0b5a50e0-df3b-42ea-83c6-80bc16cf39fb","0d14295d-a954-4163-8974-ecb51bd464e8","0d96e6b1-57f6-4555-8711-703a6c818eea","0e464dfa-d504-4806-9005-c1ba38758bf8","0e518ac8-dc53-4c79-938a-bd26c1142eeb","0ea7c6a7-d2c1-498f-aa00-f3fc942206ed","0ef4d3e4-844c-47ee-a430-8f171ec4c000","0f7493be-b335-4851-9029-9e87ba0da155","0facca96-d90c-4f21-ba98-356f7f6b1622","102a4953-33a2-4842-827e-987e3bb6ce7a","10f36230-190b-4b13-8cfc-8d12c2f37080","141518ef-ce68-4969-bb2a-66f56733fab2","15f9d255-f348-4fb7-ba3d-003ab6adcfb2","164f43df-a069-4197-9854-e7bd9fc78fae","178d6244-50cd-4bea-8e16-f951f6227a8c","18f4411e-1d84-42c5-835a-97436ad30c7c","1931e9b4-edf1-42ec-a9c4-00ff0cbcff9a","1933f8f5-8812-4e24-85bd-cdbdc83f929e","194f3e22-f4b6-483b-9333-762c3a3b6b9d","1a066d87-0093-4ca8-9c10-84c004b76c48","1a806023-ac1d-4da2-924e-25821c2554f5","1a87f314-ec7e-4407-96f2-0995e8d26fc0","1addfba0-b7e9-4722-85be-a642cdf63571","1ae756d4-675e-4a08-bc7d-ba6a3e922d5d","1b1069d2-3f50-4dd3-a8bd-0aeed6bacf98","1b74e29d-f583-4ee4-96bc-e93553c915b3","1bb0d3e5-6f04-4d91-a899-8b6f59bc228a","1c7ea343-020a-4266-9854-b12ebfa2cf50","1c8fe57c-2cee-4f73-a5f3-6ee4051024e7","1de4a13b-1497-421e-b5bc-a8ebbc7a3b18","1de65c17-36dd-4ba6-ada6-bcd98b556aad","1df33743-1016-49ce-981b-862125c0893f","1e6b9f5b-a065-4242-ae58-1f105455955f","1fe9639d-5c39-472e-94a7-73ac2b03bfce","2010c6e2-c9cb-4a3e-b22b-8cabf1044074","2013c452-d1c8-41a0-abea-92e26d231790","21fb2b00-9b86-4924-9a0d-248f976cfd93","22261df7-8974-447f-a1cf-192c59528f64","2255e304-d6ef-4707-b594-cbc3955019ec","229a7f40-f956-476e-8c84-3fd9ed3d6c29","22bf4101-c33b-4711-b6e3-379968f7c217","23a5dd2a-a53c-44b8-8b86-37e04d4cf1ee","23ff1efe-782a-4174-8f33-41a3ff0e8c44","2499d49c-748f-41d8-84d9-eed7a66ad43a","255ac21d-c17e-4926-9dad-13db7698ed72","2679a7a3-abde-4979-ac6e-5cf24113e0db","268e5866-7aea-4546-934f-f105a70b1096","26ac5726-fd69-42b8-a80e-6a71b91ba466","26b11917-4e55-41d5-aeb1-64e8b44bedba","2719a94d-d523-4fef-bfd9-a1bef16dd951","28a03096-e60c-4adb-b4fa-55f0bd28a95d","292b562c-132b-47cc-9030-d2544e801e7e","29a173b3-4587-4257-9c93-2f0c483079c5","2a59f77c-89ba-49fe-be6c-b3c9756a9940","2ad1f047-985c-4c59-aa13-749fa75bcba9","2c075e82-3fe3-4b95-a68a-f0fad41e51f5","2d8a95d1-8554-4194-b427-4239c3f9ad5b","2f23ec7d-e712-46f5-ae1c-5e7634725242","2fc5c9f1-64d2-498f-8f7a-96d94b926f6d","2fe1bef6-e797-4d9f-bb5b-6f936d7a55dc","2fede3c0-46a7-46e8-a776-5a6fd6d3f08e","31cae76c-aa62-4328-bd40-368275f60e9f","31f1f824-c698-4b97-a52a-1a1136a9ac6e","3278338f-1fa0-4045-9701-e237d5ad0930","3282adec-c328-4317-a091-a126587d78de","32bc8e29-1313-4d9b-86ff-8c3bb665f057","33326887-4ed0-4562-a0ac-b889d6ad53a9","336a89c4-d98a-4242-8803-4d479689bc4d","3401730f-3850-4c7d-884f-dcdb1d086c42","34b8b88f-e283-46cd-ba6e-f373dc3d4395","34dc1c1f-d12c-4230-bb1c-e41b6961f288","3624ed70-d464-4caa-9b4e-4dfc2ed435dc","368930a7-2085-43bd-bb79-62d471c9e75c","36a70fc6-de5a-494c-9dc5-801fe7a7a53d","3797cfc4-05a5-422b-b823-ed3bb850f540","3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","3865528e-cbb8-4615-af7d-f9ab01e9fe4d","38d24327-d93d-472b-99ac-246351c7dbfd","3911de79-cbfd-4eaa-9311-207b452faa93","394a5ff5-76f3-4885-87ed-4a6879611c22","39a9fb26-817d-404e-a150-4e4c5ebc037c","39e61860-2a60-448c-838e-a7f01e4d0c5c","3c0e9d23-f858-47eb-8e7a-23db1d42822a","3cdd0ffb-841b-4883-9b1a-df7b28022554","3d6b98eb-c79e-460c-883b-9c997ffea009","3e2829b3-2380-49cb-a370-77a313e8eaa1","3e325b99-7611-4f89-8963-7f79c5ac4105","3f674523-5416-4b89-8cab-fe3ddf3c9e7e","411b1d1a-7b18-4425-90f0-da2c296625eb","4216dab3-b436-422a-a6ee-74b5858f7aa2","4260e03f-c3cd-480c-827c-7ebe3a09e913","4299b01d-c5ab-4283-ae2d-31aa1fdbbfec","432f2c6e-3092-44cd-bf1b-54249b31ad6b","438c4f31-19bd-4ff3-bed4-035569ec6cbf","43de8661-2844-46b7-bb39-15eb17f6b82e","43e20f96-27cb-4f67-b7e5-6228aea8e7b6","445ff19b-5429-4a55-be3f-c4b03481b04f","4469e268-1b01-49b7-a436-ea4a88ba6269","451d9824-7933-403d-beaa-1ac6398509c9","45fdd40d-5bc4-4fe7-9eb9-883c55f14a70","46441742-607f-484f-80fe-b1334048144a","4661fe17-e88d-41ab-a8c6-9aefcbbaed5c","471bc3da-bbd4-417c-875a-595a713be7fd","4726ed7e-d61a-4a2c-9e05-59cbaa4f1bf0","473ed916-1979-4222-b1e8-38d39c51fe03","47635cd8-696c-4adf-94ed-338f084a3d62","484a6113-0a95-4624-8291-c00710260e4d","4974f73f-37bc-4300-8d31-d97ca337365b","4a021f95-539e-4217-98a0-d651be9a3b47","4a638904-2bcf-4037-8afd-ec6e5b0b6b11","4c67d899-fab5-4e78-9274-526d6a4fe0bb","4cd73621-691c-4866-91c1-0b99d0d1a89a","4d6ab7d0-4e16-4d1b-aa49-7f453c9352b6","4d7063c6-5201-4ce1-89ed-75ee21d51b98","4f3026f8-7217-4bf9-af6e-71bcad8bb1c5","4fa075c9-a30f-47e5-8f09-158017bfd6d6","502ff9a1-ac00-4ef2-96cb-0a0614085766","504dd102-6089-4fcb-a066-0006720862a7","508d009a-650f-4e40-b03d-ebef9d2c069e","5118358f-2777-4bfd-a761-adb4bc1da763","526515f5-4a82-4b0b-9e1c-7f3a2aa4cde4","52bd3a8a-1c92-484d-8be6-5f7e4a7274e1","534ab39c-32c3-46ea-a742-5095170a0003","5374dadc-cd7f-41df-b8d9-8ef7c10ec693","53f8ec9a-900f-481f-bfb5-a6ca452416ed","5406e730-2d78-47b4-ba27-fc933e691eab","54637d34-f16e-4e98-84c1-681a0fca559c","54686005-b842-4cc5-82b1-0276e36a42b6","550bda80-b5be-488a-89f6-64b9698b4033","554708da-6872-4a1b-91cc-3beeb59fbf2e","5710a503-9fbe-46ae-abd5-2663069b70db","57b2326c-e877-4995-82fc-221eda139718","5804b97c-c416-49d1-9fbd-5bb52c0595dd","58163259-bc87-4025-a6cc-f3a0848b52cf","58679f65-396b-4b1f-b725-9907ebc9f038","58ac029e-4204-42c4-8ff3-6dbd84dd382a","58c8e8bf-9cbd-46dd-8a8b-b1b5cbb0d58d","590fff58-7ba9-4a5b-8232-4c27d67f13b1","5a7bde0b-59e0-4f86-9b63-2bbebb593d41","5c86116b-5fae-45a9-b467-01fc8b26a166","5d222c9b-8733-4d3b-abaa-59f77da35546","5f6c5fd0-a2f8-4bfe-9ac4-a8d06bc8640a","5fa4530c-d60b-48c1-b6b2-371abff6d77a","60ccacb1-7c41-4259-b651-bfbf60e7b53a","6135126e-45b3-4fe7-a80f-82248b08ea7b","61a00782-20f7-4170-b4e2-d9d9157b3a3c","620bfde0-ec72-4b52-bfa4-e06ce3b56960","62bc0e3c-1d90-4688-bc1b-e00f620c5c8c","634a0a0f-0899-427f-9396-6cc3c5442643","6411a3a1-2932-41eb-b497-f9a2400de74c","64902247-dbff-448d-987f-c89ac2e30538","66bb816a-1961-4e45-8460-9328304c7956","6721b632-2b4f-492a-840d-bb05d2a9f1af","672ecfdb-cb9d-485d-8fc1-76e6a8269fe7","67c4a0dd-5f32-4dde-b733-4a4a9e5dfafb","68753b50-8fe7-4499-bb2d-ddfcc7e16c94","6901ef7b-f98a-4b3a-b622-85196fe10ffb","696bb9a6-aa69-4de4-a566-5df21482bc51","6a44ea24-a3bf-4ad8-96b1-5ae56cefb84c","6ab671c9-310c-4d88-bd88-0251180b2345","6cf864fb-5956-4416-a1c5-f42153e66ec4","6ee56cf3-78f2-4420-bede-08f76397b2fb","6f00035b-1437-428d-895c-a234866e29e0","6f4adcf4-c63b-41c9-b7f6-0b0f4e75c857","706246bb-b5c8-4d73-81fa-2e93d040c762","706f0136-7ae5-45f2-b804-e3a8c9a14d1c","70b9c7ef-3983-40dd-b904-5607537ff37f","73066633-67a8-4240-8c5a-3c4ae29b486d","73369c4a-c44b-4b7a-b3cc-07766ccb4e2a","73e97a89-5b5f-4104-bc6a-50b8f564040a","747400a0-bfad-4fa2-8004-06f237d1c543","75eac450-5d76-45da-975a-a47f1515ca01","75f7eb04-35fe-48ce-af4a-d0ccf3067076","77ed2567-2595-48f0-891b-a753164f2866","7855cb39-b177-4d3b-bd72-0a18afd5415b","79cfeedd-0cef-4026-962d-c86d241c4e56","79f059b8-00b2-4345-ad46-440c7bc371df","7a539249-77a2-4e2b-a29f-6952304d80d7","7a59b547-cf09-4b46-bbfe-d7a7f34b7cfc","7b3b345d-0902-4461-a6bc-747c26feb7f2","7c914cb3-8ba1-4768-ac56-a051b75a6e8b","7ddc7283-670a-4dfb-9e38-a11aa0c579c2","8151434e-f600-47a9-93df-16b483e88961","815dcb75-691c-4066-a898-b7ed46fdbdf2","816a43e1-6b33-4a27-a385-9d12dd8e924f","8187d86e-f46c-4e26-8188-a4e7b31de2f6","81b21166-1d16-4aec-910f-b382f9680f5f","81f9e1b1-71fd-45a2-9292-017420336059","8205ac1a-be22-438c-b3e0-f7aa463d3501","824601ea-5309-4ddf-bc61-486c992e309c","835cbabf-d424-4f04-89cb-1d8c0b08f1ab","83bf777b-6ee5-4e82-bd85-6e374853473a","84512e93-e51a-4c89-88dd-ecc2afc0699a","84a895b3-81ad-42e9-b54d-614c66aca856","84ea460e-bfc2-4977-aebb-32594a90693b","85680853-3899-4f21-b262-dbe3e8893779","8577ca11-d1ef-4517-846f-747a51b46f07","867c2a12-155a-4309-aff0-300c6125824c","86b559ac-3645-468b-9f43-7d961bd255d7","8779026e-22f2-4276-a7b9-695e4e569057","892c7a97-bb6b-47a5-9402-8a5293acf25b","897c7de9-ed19-4ee2-a2d5-85b75355519d","89e1831f-7c8d-46ad-b545-7b0e141b1fa7","8aaa4093-987c-4a1d-8fbd-8e1d1e495fe3","8b1ef2e6-f7a2-4db0-9589-42159cf06574","8d8b9ba9-5da4-4861-89db-348400c8ef68","8e0f3d53-2c44-474d-9787-4713b7050c28","8e4f2f4a-8039-4ba0-9b6d-beecad106136","8eb102f2-a097-496b-8975-3d2cd6e31a8d","8ecfae6d-fb77-4dfe-9f9b-f1425d8a13da","8ef8782e-cc91-4ddc-95d5-d260f1b7a518","905b10d3-5531-40bc-b5e3-84beb79f1af2","91aa9ca8-e7d7-4036-a22f-5c8c8e7fc2ce","920f5e05-04f9-4545-b26d-ea48a1f18a2f","92b301e8-97fb-47a7-94a6-b858beb0a1fb","9368fe71-a18d-4580-8063-8e3f17e6cec9","9379cea2-647c-459b-af54-770e31e9bbe1","93c87fee-61ec-4ea8-bd4f-3434669835ee","93ec7040-a06c-4da5-b0b1-626399456a8a","944709d1-19c5-461e-a509-d35f5314cc8e","946d9238-09b9-474e-8481-5e734cedca7a","948eda84-20a8-442d-8a0a-ffba051904a4","94d114b9-3c47-468e-8714-ed449f90e8e4","94faca18-b471-4748-8bab-f399641cedbd","95044e07-ad37-43f6-95b0-cebe1e9f8ce0","95b8351c-9ddb-457d-9035-ad3b6d181dc7","96621df7-0c9b-41e5-a5a6-3f21a24613d5","96adc5c1-5a68-473e-9d38-85bed792c8fc","97c9d44f-1ca4-489d-a786-dc23f1fe1175","980db746-8492-4784-ab7e-f6c3b10378e1","9849e210-d94b-448b-885e-7bdffe11cfe9","9bd6a50e-945d-42d4-88de-97e83b4c3b06","9c74f902-2ef0-4269-b436-acc19aa11ea5","9c81b00b-87e1-4cce-bfc8-9583b3b8a234","9cbf8104-4fa2-4365-bc32-09eb2d1c9381","9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","9d92713b-a9c4-4b7e-87f4-c4fd443e38b5","9f454843-a34c-4619-a576-493f835993b4","9fe3b91d-3719-4260-926a-d5711bd1efc4","a06cd968-9dc5-42c5-a6e8-3d3c36dfc8c2","a18ba308-f8ab-4590-b466-daf80aa2b59c","a3aeeb23-ea47-454e-9079-05e2142e157d","a3ce7cd2-ee71-42ce-b4f7-96a81c6bd295","a45c3495-d077-4241-b1d7-72fa109d0e6b","a6385d09-ca9d-4f95-b5ba-4f50630bec35","a7002128-c4bc-48cd-bed1-46a529e69132","a7cc57e8-71f7-4536-ba7c-452e09344a18","a96905fe-9d68-4a0c-9c4e-ce250411fcd9","a9c15856-f188-45d4-80a8-7929118af59a","aa57f0d8-8cb4-4c4c-8ef4-4c4acdef25e4","ab7d0ab2-d774-415c-bd3f-a606f92ef3c3","abb94f1c-6bf3-442d-9749-eacc170b025c","ac5e071a-48a2-4a53-a1f6-5fc7b6d35280","adad636e-6844-49cb-bb07-54ff4f1a044f","add15855-56e0-4264-819c-b8e8110846aa","adfa4015-b34e-4488-99e4-b20b4dc10324","aec84261-126b-4386-b0f4-15f160ca67ae","aed9cf49-b6d3-4952-8acb-37e1eae1c31a","b26721cc-ba4b-460e-a726-17bebda4c82e","b293dea5-f7e1-4889-a56d-f823569cdff4","b3b632d3-bab8-43e4-9749-51b79e59f7dd","b3e58970-8bf0-4e37-a8f9-dd4fce60bf46","b40ee428-0e50-4a51-aca9-a9074c0486cf","b4a8aa1a-7262-4318-9579-9fff20f959a6","b4b614f7-a43d-4e57-9766-25f7fef90d68","b556af30-b2db-4273-8b3b-a5b1ec113ebb","b55fc156-b5e6-49b6-b4f1-e092d3b4f553","b5940660-7f58-4123-bb25-6f78d4e1694d","b77861f3-9e86-4450-a13f-4522abb6a8ef","b78601e1-6600-408f-bc8c-52407a676ecb","b8eebc63-ef4e-4144-9327-420f594806c6","bc813ec4-3453-4fe2-a5d0-884fdb51bfc7","bcd183c8-344e-4cb8-8561-8c2e6a027897","bcd80071-6449-4036-accf-62939d2bc771","bdc8358e-29a2-4efa-a99e-6023a27df35b","bf5cf44c-c3df-4c9c-b13b-8a0108b8a106","c0981bc0-6d81-46d5-a2fc-715c6a5662b8","c2853c18-cc20-43b6-bd36-3b77725ba1d7","c2875090-e4c1-4cec-be8a-7218c8774f6b","c349f006-e1f4-498e-970a-626a724e2231","c3aa82e4-0707-4514-a535-22d6d4a7f0b2","c4b35547-a0d3-4cad-b391-177ba64d7c63","c51ad2dc-5440-4692-bdac-73968c6ad4d2","c5597192-fe4a-479a-8bf7-cdcf15d74d10","c66f7c07-f922-4abd-8805-71a0fade560f","c6b3635d-7479-4594-9803-195c9d36f4a1","c6dcef79-69bf-47eb-a0b5-7b4d6bef00fc","c6e1c64f-1094-4a24-9d3e-8103fb4d94ab","c6e6e3f3-bc85-48dc-ad18-bb08d31d7308","c7589046-9f75-46b4-bd78-c3fe0703df52","c7803b74-2f5d-47d0-a09e-c27ed98ec1a3","c7af7c66-9a6d-42c8-8695-bcd164ed856b","c8ddee14-df38-49aa-9d85-a7c6b34273a6","c999d71f-777d-4d80-9f37-37391f97acd4","caae3943-065a-475a-a6fe-f5706ce3db97","cb333cad-a0a7-4971-8f06-e4ca49e58c39","cbdf7850-c12b-44e7-9a2a-2e88994f389f","cddf4a6a-4d4e-4d8b-9631-734b807f7215","ce0c52be-896a-479c-b92b-09bf3518d332","cf1f664f-fab8-46ef-9768-c3fc897d3913","cf35dad3-c846-4c5e-91db-577efd256f78","cfa001c3-f0fc-45cd-8a71-3e35d2026e1f","cfd3be60-c380-4a63-8e12-5fd8af9b72bd","d11fa038-1162-4d93-9df5-6d5b35b8628b","d156577c-5001-4f1b-90f7-d7b21a37497b","d18985ea-8239-498e-9147-eda1d0bb8bde","d20d6d55-e1d9-462f-902a-31987fc17f06","d2c92cf6-2a73-4e89-adff-db3cb523f8e1","d2f303e3-c25c-412f-8ae4-4ec525f68736","d301dc8a-7194-46ad-bf04-43efdc78c053","d315d00d-a3eb-4c0f-9554-c1395585910f","d3bd5582-331f-4b89-96d8-d988dabaecd2","d3c6617c-2925-40b2-aa72-9b0b6c5e83d4","d405b9b8-3fd3-4230-a3d3-ccdd34abd185","d5ff3294-0ecd-48eb-b9dd-a2c0282a055a","d6f9dd1e-cee9-48ff-a7e7-71d7a7b8f61d","d7c49d74-0c9c-470b-94ad-c7ccaa111eaf","d7f7d93d-fda2-48cd-89a3-7b5c35ec6480","d8ab6193-0742-4b7e-99ea-f1131b5fc36f","d96f8ae8-4753-4f7b-9ec5-3238eca05841","d9794536-257f-4a12-8d46-a7c0c649fb97","dab486f0-dfe1-46a8-b0d8-32e2a200b8e8","db8eb9e3-f6e6-4be4-b6d2-d135a6c3e9ac","dc0f107c-d6af-40f2-b8fd-d6a8264071a5","dd99547d-81d1-4764-ba78-52a1cddf906d","ddada193-97b9-4ccc-8a51-bfbea77a0c06","df6dd614-6785-4c3a-b6c7-1e091a751c64","e06bafea-36a4-40ac-8e47-2a2619fd46fd","e1083f09-5ed1-4bdf-8ac5-3c65482b8e5f","e1955bc5-123d-4ca0-b875-2d75b1f718f1","e1bbca7c-14db-40cf-a128-0219f12466a3","e256486b-ee32-4d0f-9cba-d02bf4bd780a","e27aa94c-fa47-4a58-bc17-1e5d3387b739","e2a4561f-b8bf-4ca9-9990-3b885eaf5c2b","e2f38cc3-06ff-4db2-8aad-a537c1e1d0c8","e446ef0a-2a74-42bf-bcd6-2b793506650e","e4aba04c-81ff-438c-a506-881ff2436c82","e500f58c-3afd-4143-b4d2-f60500bf9023","e53f3cca-ca53-449c-9f09-737f317fb169","e6d36e44-00e2-4f9e-95b1-e892e44117eb","e6e7e00b-0ede-4741-8419-066a93e431cd","e6f33250-4650-42ce-96e8-87ce7eebc853","e70df749-9305-44b3-8a30-defc332a7fa4","e7a8eb39-66a7-4777-a0d6-cfb00f8f0798","e8fbbd18-0c64-4437-9ea9-4b4877081943","e9029bad-f0af-4178-8545-61b8bf20d98f","ea0bba2c-7a56-40f2-afac-00f638b54fc3","ea27969f-7a0b-4e5c-9893-7763d5fdbfbf","ea51c75b-4b85-48fb-bbb7-8fde23c110aa","ea6c8861-7a39-4e19-8e71-58720131fa8d","eac2c9bd-6ddc-48dc-92e0-405c318acfb0","eb7f5240-b11f-4c58-9681-91c05d2c3f50","eb84cbb3-24d1-4565-9ec1-8bd3b9d4bec9","ec990258-7999-4c93-81af-59b6ab2c65df","ed2c35d4-102a-4b73-8382-2ac35610faed","edf6b48c-90dc-4757-814e-999556997808","eec20343-5ffa-486c-b431-59ca5e4568d4","ef391115-fde1-44aa-ab00-abb8e2e7ec82","efb7c5ac-4ac5-4964-80cb-f95ebaa0e04c","f0a80593-3eca-497d-afa0-90d16a414e1d","f121b53e-c2bd-4ce5-878c-fd5a64863273","f1307eae-cbfb-4f04-b6cc-3facd9e296d6","f19a484a-77bd-4389-8266-523228328091","f1ba13f7-7414-47ce-9df3-a6aa0902c1b9","f1f602c9-64cd-4bfc-855c-fb8060a9c483","f24f8cd0-0ca1-49cf-8cf1-4a5e6b938fe3","f25f2d19-18b4-4e7e-ad7b-8f30a193b3d6","f267ac1f-eff8-417a-8920-f8d37e384f79","f289c668-0c40-41e6-82af-ae6829b262d4","f319102d-533a-41ff-9f08-6bda6778bb7e","f40851bc-e6e8-4605-ba83-f44d932b4760","f4c53608-9890-4b9f-89a3-7c1028bc1e05","f502d85e-d523-4b8c-9dec-469aa08204df","f5653eaf-7d13-4c91-93c7-e30daca2ec3a","f5876a8c-263e-4134-a5b2-ba2453ed9080","f58af8d2-a271-4586-b2b4-1b399c9f84de","f5c77efa-f72b-424c-a810-81cd552ba3de","f62defd3-7975-4edf-8f34-40a36b487ac8","f6e3366d-13bc-4a60-94b6-f77a2c2032c0","f75dd4aa-d0bc-4078-857d-76a41f9df08f","f9720bd0-18fb-4774-96e6-eca25490f73e","fa1e38b4-4ced-4f4b-9a7b-b1b89ff13da7","fa93085f-260f-4f91-af1c-c85c03ca06fa","faaca14c-514a-4f25-897a-cd9bbc31d5d0","fb4d21e7-be93-4775-905f-977427db28c4","fc91133d-e4b6-4458-8d6c-cb1af7bcd97e","fdc662ec-5ed7-4d04-8993-6144ff01abc2","fe4e9bc0-2802-4dd8-97e4-27704fad2a1b","fec4e8d2-6a2f-4046-b9d4-85a831f76655","fee252e0-d871-44c1-8917-1fd2d148377a","ff092982-3b6e-4f4c-8194-6b8201ee1246","ff4c3069-118e-4f08-aa39-6394130a8ec4","oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-055a850c7fce9512","oil-05aa031a4b58524e","oil-06d5928124689ba0","oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-081117bbf714a215","oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0","oil-0d7b13a282f9b466","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","oil-13fd5c31e278a577","oil-156fd0980ec51fe6","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-1852e8a212bd5903","oil-1c3f4e35a1252449","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-23d97461886d2622","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-42c4efcdce45e35d","oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-438415c185832786","oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-4b88eb2520f8cc22","oil-4bd4c6831e9c7077","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-5413f17944743156","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-63426d939d718e7f","oil-63f43befc46e25fa","oil-66b89ef48f4536a9","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-7269f661e72c703f","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-7ced813eb9eb1314","oil-7ed3f9582cae741d","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-846611108e27fafb","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-86a403aef71f924e","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-8e1ede70f7533502","oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77","oil-94951aba738c80b3","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-9c21da748413e6f9","oil-9f582ea75e0eddfb","oil-a0831d014f72baf3","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-a882a3e8b7aeb487","oil-a9685f88d15906f6","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-b434a85e1e9196d0","oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-bd1df718191f8f6e","oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","oil-c0e8fd0149fa83c4","oil-c1a2f95596a3b00d","oil-c2fa50179af284f7","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-c4d815318f8299b0","oil-c72d68cafd2478be","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-c94e003c369b3450","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-ce4031737a7654b3","oil-d276b566dce62194","oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","oil-d479413f1e610f85","oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-e1cd585e16b9635b","oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","oil-e72f16ac2686175c","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f1693a0670f7b784","oil-f5b6386895404f0b","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-f96a10806285c261","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-fba2e5ff157abb74","oil-fc5474312cf8529f","oil-fc714f38909e4348","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","oil-fcda56b4bb45ffd3","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5","oil-ff34df409a4806f1"],"entries":[{"id":"claim_statuses:entry:unconfirmed-or-qualified-finding:alleged","name":"Alleged","definition":"The source attributes the issue as an allegation.","occurrences":343,"article_count":335,"event_count":343,"article_ids":["008cc0e4-d7d7-475f-80d8-d81621e7b862","0109eea0-3adc-4177-a6f7-e3bc31bf237d","030df41e-ccfc-4023-a026-89cc92bf3253","03ea9124-befd-4983-bcdc-147e3ed3bf73","04c00967-a247-4802-b3c2-3f266885c385","05375704-5b45-4e0a-b388-9944c0c5fc9f","0932679a-fe82-4a1e-949e-9d4fd17ed2a0","0a23e582-3dac-4091-bf36-a08d511a3763","0a342064-5378-4aff-b4aa-34ae5c1ab66b","0aa842b8-1ac9-4243-a8b6-5d98d32d6089","0af3703f-23ec-4f8f-a1b6-45b4adb68b12","0d14295d-a954-4163-8974-ecb51bd464e8","0d96e6b1-57f6-4555-8711-703a6c818eea","0e518ac8-dc53-4c79-938a-bd26c1142eeb","0ea7c6a7-d2c1-498f-aa00-f3fc942206ed","0ef4d3e4-844c-47ee-a430-8f171ec4c000","0facca96-d90c-4f21-ba98-356f7f6b1622","102a4953-33a2-4842-827e-987e3bb6ce7a","10f36230-190b-4b13-8cfc-8d12c2f37080","141518ef-ce68-4969-bb2a-66f56733fab2","15f9d255-f348-4fb7-ba3d-003ab6adcfb2","164f43df-a069-4197-9854-e7bd9fc78fae","18f4411e-1d84-42c5-835a-97436ad30c7c","1933f8f5-8812-4e24-85bd-cdbdc83f929e","194f3e22-f4b6-483b-9333-762c3a3b6b9d","1a806023-ac1d-4da2-924e-25821c2554f5","1a87f314-ec7e-4407-96f2-0995e8d26fc0","1addfba0-b7e9-4722-85be-a642cdf63571","1b1069d2-3f50-4dd3-a8bd-0aeed6bacf98","1bb0d3e5-6f04-4d91-a899-8b6f59bc228a","1c7ea343-020a-4266-9854-b12ebfa2cf50","1de4a13b-1497-421e-b5bc-a8ebbc7a3b18","1df33743-1016-49ce-981b-862125c0893f","1e6b9f5b-a065-4242-ae58-1f105455955f","1fe9639d-5c39-472e-94a7-73ac2b03bfce","2010c6e2-c9cb-4a3e-b22b-8cabf1044074","2013c452-d1c8-41a0-abea-92e26d231790","21fb2b00-9b86-4924-9a0d-248f976cfd93","22261df7-8974-447f-a1cf-192c59528f64","2255e304-d6ef-4707-b594-cbc3955019ec","229a7f40-f956-476e-8c84-3fd9ed3d6c29","22bf4101-c33b-4711-b6e3-379968f7c217","23a5dd2a-a53c-44b8-8b86-37e04d4cf1ee","2499d49c-748f-41d8-84d9-eed7a66ad43a","255ac21d-c17e-4926-9dad-13db7698ed72","26ac5726-fd69-42b8-a80e-6a71b91ba466","2719a94d-d523-4fef-bfd9-a1bef16dd951","28a03096-e60c-4adb-b4fa-55f0bd28a95d","29a173b3-4587-4257-9c93-2f0c483079c5","2a59f77c-89ba-49fe-be6c-b3c9756a9940","2ad1f047-985c-4c59-aa13-749fa75bcba9","2d8a95d1-8554-4194-b427-4239c3f9ad5b","2f23ec7d-e712-46f5-ae1c-5e7634725242","2fe1bef6-e797-4d9f-bb5b-6f936d7a55dc","2fede3c0-46a7-46e8-a776-5a6fd6d3f08e","31cae76c-aa62-4328-bd40-368275f60e9f","3278338f-1fa0-4045-9701-e237d5ad0930","3282adec-c328-4317-a091-a126587d78de","32bc8e29-1313-4d9b-86ff-8c3bb665f057","33326887-4ed0-4562-a0ac-b889d6ad53a9","3401730f-3850-4c7d-884f-dcdb1d086c42","34b8b88f-e283-46cd-ba6e-f373dc3d4395","34dc1c1f-d12c-4230-bb1c-e41b6961f288","3624ed70-d464-4caa-9b4e-4dfc2ed435dc","36a70fc6-de5a-494c-9dc5-801fe7a7a53d","3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","3865528e-cbb8-4615-af7d-f9ab01e9fe4d","3911de79-cbfd-4eaa-9311-207b452faa93","39e61860-2a60-448c-838e-a7f01e4d0c5c","3c0e9d23-f858-47eb-8e7a-23db1d42822a","3cdd0ffb-841b-4883-9b1a-df7b28022554","3d6b98eb-c79e-460c-883b-9c997ffea009","3e2829b3-2380-49cb-a370-77a313e8eaa1","3e325b99-7611-4f89-8963-7f79c5ac4105","3f674523-5416-4b89-8cab-fe3ddf3c9e7e","4216dab3-b436-422a-a6ee-74b5858f7aa2","43e20f96-27cb-4f67-b7e5-6228aea8e7b6","445ff19b-5429-4a55-be3f-c4b03481b04f","451d9824-7933-403d-beaa-1ac6398509c9","45fdd40d-5bc4-4fe7-9eb9-883c55f14a70","4661fe17-e88d-41ab-a8c6-9aefcbbaed5c","471bc3da-bbd4-417c-875a-595a713be7fd","473ed916-1979-4222-b1e8-38d39c51fe03","47635cd8-696c-4adf-94ed-338f084a3d62","4974f73f-37bc-4300-8d31-d97ca337365b","4a638904-2bcf-4037-8afd-ec6e5b0b6b11","4c67d899-fab5-4e78-9274-526d6a4fe0bb","4cd73621-691c-4866-91c1-0b99d0d1a89a","4d6ab7d0-4e16-4d1b-aa49-7f453c9352b6","4d7063c6-5201-4ce1-89ed-75ee21d51b98","4f3026f8-7217-4bf9-af6e-71bcad8bb1c5","4fa075c9-a30f-47e5-8f09-158017bfd6d6","502ff9a1-ac00-4ef2-96cb-0a0614085766","504dd102-6089-4fcb-a066-0006720862a7","508d009a-650f-4e40-b03d-ebef9d2c069e","526515f5-4a82-4b0b-9e1c-7f3a2aa4cde4","52bd3a8a-1c92-484d-8be6-5f7e4a7274e1","534ab39c-32c3-46ea-a742-5095170a0003","53f8ec9a-900f-481f-bfb5-a6ca452416ed","5406e730-2d78-47b4-ba27-fc933e691eab","54637d34-f16e-4e98-84c1-681a0fca559c","54686005-b842-4cc5-82b1-0276e36a42b6","550bda80-b5be-488a-89f6-64b9698b4033","554708da-6872-4a1b-91cc-3beeb59fbf2e","5710a503-9fbe-46ae-abd5-2663069b70db","57b2326c-e877-4995-82fc-221eda139718","5804b97c-c416-49d1-9fbd-5bb52c0595dd","58679f65-396b-4b1f-b725-9907ebc9f038","58ac029e-4204-42c4-8ff3-6dbd84dd382a","590fff58-7ba9-4a5b-8232-4c27d67f13b1","5a7bde0b-59e0-4f86-9b63-2bbebb593d41","5c86116b-5fae-45a9-b467-01fc8b26a166","5d222c9b-8733-4d3b-abaa-59f77da35546","5f6c5fd0-a2f8-4bfe-9ac4-a8d06bc8640a","5fa4530c-d60b-48c1-b6b2-371abff6d77a","60ccacb1-7c41-4259-b651-bfbf60e7b53a","6135126e-45b3-4fe7-a80f-82248b08ea7b","61a00782-20f7-4170-b4e2-d9d9157b3a3c","620bfde0-ec72-4b52-bfa4-e06ce3b56960","62bc0e3c-1d90-4688-bc1b-e00f620c5c8c","634a0a0f-0899-427f-9396-6cc3c5442643","6411a3a1-2932-41eb-b497-f9a2400de74c","66bb816a-1961-4e45-8460-9328304c7956","6721b632-2b4f-492a-840d-bb05d2a9f1af","672ecfdb-cb9d-485d-8fc1-76e6a8269fe7","68753b50-8fe7-4499-bb2d-ddfcc7e16c94","6901ef7b-f98a-4b3a-b622-85196fe10ffb","6ab671c9-310c-4d88-bd88-0251180b2345","6ee56cf3-78f2-4420-bede-08f76397b2fb","6f4adcf4-c63b-41c9-b7f6-0b0f4e75c857","706246bb-b5c8-4d73-81fa-2e93d040c762","706f0136-7ae5-45f2-b804-e3a8c9a14d1c","70b9c7ef-3983-40dd-b904-5607537ff37f","73066633-67a8-4240-8c5a-3c4ae29b486d","73369c4a-c44b-4b7a-b3cc-07766ccb4e2a","73e97a89-5b5f-4104-bc6a-50b8f564040a","747400a0-bfad-4fa2-8004-06f237d1c543","75eac450-5d76-45da-975a-a47f1515ca01","75f7eb04-35fe-48ce-af4a-d0ccf3067076","79f059b8-00b2-4345-ad46-440c7bc371df","7a539249-77a2-4e2b-a29f-6952304d80d7","7b3b345d-0902-4461-a6bc-747c26feb7f2","7ddc7283-670a-4dfb-9e38-a11aa0c579c2","8151434e-f600-47a9-93df-16b483e88961","815dcb75-691c-4066-a898-b7ed46fdbdf2","816a43e1-6b33-4a27-a385-9d12dd8e924f","8187d86e-f46c-4e26-8188-a4e7b31de2f6","81b21166-1d16-4aec-910f-b382f9680f5f","81f9e1b1-71fd-45a2-9292-017420336059","8205ac1a-be22-438c-b3e0-f7aa463d3501","824601ea-5309-4ddf-bc61-486c992e309c","835cbabf-d424-4f04-89cb-1d8c0b08f1ab","83bf777b-6ee5-4e82-bd85-6e374853473a","84512e93-e51a-4c89-88dd-ecc2afc0699a","84a895b3-81ad-42e9-b54d-614c66aca856","84ea460e-bfc2-4977-aebb-32594a90693b","85680853-3899-4f21-b262-dbe3e8893779","8577ca11-d1ef-4517-846f-747a51b46f07","867c2a12-155a-4309-aff0-300c6125824c","86b559ac-3645-468b-9f43-7d961bd255d7","8779026e-22f2-4276-a7b9-695e4e569057","892c7a97-bb6b-47a5-9402-8a5293acf25b","897c7de9-ed19-4ee2-a2d5-85b75355519d","89e1831f-7c8d-46ad-b545-7b0e141b1fa7","8aaa4093-987c-4a1d-8fbd-8e1d1e495fe3","8b1ef2e6-f7a2-4db0-9589-42159cf06574","8d8b9ba9-5da4-4861-89db-348400c8ef68","8e4f2f4a-8039-4ba0-9b6d-beecad106136","8ecfae6d-fb77-4dfe-9f9b-f1425d8a13da","8ef8782e-cc91-4ddc-95d5-d260f1b7a518","905b10d3-5531-40bc-b5e3-84beb79f1af2","91aa9ca8-e7d7-4036-a22f-5c8c8e7fc2ce","920f5e05-04f9-4545-b26d-ea48a1f18a2f","9368fe71-a18d-4580-8063-8e3f17e6cec9","9379cea2-647c-459b-af54-770e31e9bbe1","93c87fee-61ec-4ea8-bd4f-3434669835ee","93ec7040-a06c-4da5-b0b1-626399456a8a","946d9238-09b9-474e-8481-5e734cedca7a","94d114b9-3c47-468e-8714-ed449f90e8e4","94faca18-b471-4748-8bab-f399641cedbd","95b8351c-9ddb-457d-9035-ad3b6d181dc7","96adc5c1-5a68-473e-9d38-85bed792c8fc","97c9d44f-1ca4-489d-a786-dc23f1fe1175","9c74f902-2ef0-4269-b436-acc19aa11ea5","9c81b00b-87e1-4cce-bfc8-9583b3b8a234","9cbf8104-4fa2-4365-bc32-09eb2d1c9381","9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","9d92713b-a9c4-4b7e-87f4-c4fd443e38b5","9f454843-a34c-4619-a576-493f835993b4","a06cd968-9dc5-42c5-a6e8-3d3c36dfc8c2","a3aeeb23-ea47-454e-9079-05e2142e157d","a3ce7cd2-ee71-42ce-b4f7-96a81c6bd295","a45c3495-d077-4241-b1d7-72fa109d0e6b","a6385d09-ca9d-4f95-b5ba-4f50630bec35","a7cc57e8-71f7-4536-ba7c-452e09344a18","a96905fe-9d68-4a0c-9c4e-ce250411fcd9","a9c15856-f188-45d4-80a8-7929118af59a","aa57f0d8-8cb4-4c4c-8ef4-4c4acdef25e4","ab7d0ab2-d774-415c-bd3f-a606f92ef3c3","ac5e071a-48a2-4a53-a1f6-5fc7b6d35280","adad636e-6844-49cb-bb07-54ff4f1a044f","adfa4015-b34e-4488-99e4-b20b4dc10324","aec84261-126b-4386-b0f4-15f160ca67ae","b26721cc-ba4b-460e-a726-17bebda4c82e","b293dea5-f7e1-4889-a56d-f823569cdff4","b3e58970-8bf0-4e37-a8f9-dd4fce60bf46","b40ee428-0e50-4a51-aca9-a9074c0486cf","b4b614f7-a43d-4e57-9766-25f7fef90d68","b556af30-b2db-4273-8b3b-a5b1ec113ebb","b55fc156-b5e6-49b6-b4f1-e092d3b4f553","b5940660-7f58-4123-bb25-6f78d4e1694d","b78601e1-6600-408f-bc8c-52407a676ecb","b8eebc63-ef4e-4144-9327-420f594806c6","bc813ec4-3453-4fe2-a5d0-884fdb51bfc7","bcd183c8-344e-4cb8-8561-8c2e6a027897","bcd80071-6449-4036-accf-62939d2bc771","bdc8358e-29a2-4efa-a99e-6023a27df35b","bf5cf44c-c3df-4c9c-b13b-8a0108b8a106","c0981bc0-6d81-46d5-a2fc-715c6a5662b8","c2853c18-cc20-43b6-bd36-3b77725ba1d7","c2875090-e4c1-4cec-be8a-7218c8774f6b","c3aa82e4-0707-4514-a535-22d6d4a7f0b2","c4b35547-a0d3-4cad-b391-177ba64d7c63","c51ad2dc-5440-4692-bdac-73968c6ad4d2","c5597192-fe4a-479a-8bf7-cdcf15d74d10","c6b3635d-7479-4594-9803-195c9d36f4a1","c6e1c64f-1094-4a24-9d3e-8103fb4d94ab","c6e6e3f3-bc85-48dc-ad18-bb08d31d7308","c7589046-9f75-46b4-bd78-c3fe0703df52","c7803b74-2f5d-47d0-a09e-c27ed98ec1a3","c7af7c66-9a6d-42c8-8695-bcd164ed856b","c8ddee14-df38-49aa-9d85-a7c6b34273a6","c999d71f-777d-4d80-9f37-37391f97acd4","caae3943-065a-475a-a6fe-f5706ce3db97","cb333cad-a0a7-4971-8f06-e4ca49e58c39","cbdf7850-c12b-44e7-9a2a-2e88994f389f","cddf4a6a-4d4e-4d8b-9631-734b807f7215","ce0c52be-896a-479c-b92b-09bf3518d332","cf1f664f-fab8-46ef-9768-c3fc897d3913","cf35dad3-c846-4c5e-91db-577efd256f78","cfa001c3-f0fc-45cd-8a71-3e35d2026e1f","cfd3be60-c380-4a63-8e12-5fd8af9b72bd","d156577c-5001-4f1b-90f7-d7b21a37497b","d18985ea-8239-498e-9147-eda1d0bb8bde","d2c92cf6-2a73-4e89-adff-db3cb523f8e1","d2f303e3-c25c-412f-8ae4-4ec525f68736","d301dc8a-7194-46ad-bf04-43efdc78c053","d315d00d-a3eb-4c0f-9554-c1395585910f","d3bd5582-331f-4b89-96d8-d988dabaecd2","d405b9b8-3fd3-4230-a3d3-ccdd34abd185","d5ff3294-0ecd-48eb-b9dd-a2c0282a055a","d6f9dd1e-cee9-48ff-a7e7-71d7a7b8f61d","d7c49d74-0c9c-470b-94ad-c7ccaa111eaf","d7f7d93d-fda2-48cd-89a3-7b5c35ec6480","d8ab6193-0742-4b7e-99ea-f1131b5fc36f","d9794536-257f-4a12-8d46-a7c0c649fb97","dab486f0-dfe1-46a8-b0d8-32e2a200b8e8","db8eb9e3-f6e6-4be4-b6d2-d135a6c3e9ac","dc0f107c-d6af-40f2-b8fd-d6a8264071a5","dd99547d-81d1-4764-ba78-52a1cddf906d","ddada193-97b9-4ccc-8a51-bfbea77a0c06","e06bafea-36a4-40ac-8e47-2a2619fd46fd","e1083f09-5ed1-4bdf-8ac5-3c65482b8e5f","e1955bc5-123d-4ca0-b875-2d75b1f718f1","e1bbca7c-14db-40cf-a128-0219f12466a3","e256486b-ee32-4d0f-9cba-d02bf4bd780a","e27aa94c-fa47-4a58-bc17-1e5d3387b739","e2a4561f-b8bf-4ca9-9990-3b885eaf5c2b","e2f38cc3-06ff-4db2-8aad-a537c1e1d0c8","e446ef0a-2a74-42bf-bcd6-2b793506650e","e53f3cca-ca53-449c-9f09-737f317fb169","e6e7e00b-0ede-4741-8419-066a93e431cd","e70df749-9305-44b3-8a30-defc332a7fa4","e7a8eb39-66a7-4777-a0d6-cfb00f8f0798","e8fbbd18-0c64-4437-9ea9-4b4877081943","e9029bad-f0af-4178-8545-61b8bf20d98f","ea0bba2c-7a56-40f2-afac-00f638b54fc3","ea27969f-7a0b-4e5c-9893-7763d5fdbfbf","ea51c75b-4b85-48fb-bbb7-8fde23c110aa","ea6c8861-7a39-4e19-8e71-58720131fa8d","eb7f5240-b11f-4c58-9681-91c05d2c3f50","ed2c35d4-102a-4b73-8382-2ac35610faed","edf6b48c-90dc-4757-814e-999556997808","eec20343-5ffa-486c-b431-59ca5e4568d4","ef391115-fde1-44aa-ab00-abb8e2e7ec82","efb7c5ac-4ac5-4964-80cb-f95ebaa0e04c","f1307eae-cbfb-4f04-b6cc-3facd9e296d6","f19a484a-77bd-4389-8266-523228328091","f24f8cd0-0ca1-49cf-8cf1-4a5e6b938fe3","f25f2d19-18b4-4e7e-ad7b-8f30a193b3d6","f267ac1f-eff8-417a-8920-f8d37e384f79","f289c668-0c40-41e6-82af-ae6829b262d4","f319102d-533a-41ff-9f08-6bda6778bb7e","f502d85e-d523-4b8c-9dec-469aa08204df","f5653eaf-7d13-4c91-93c7-e30daca2ec3a","f5c77efa-f72b-424c-a810-81cd552ba3de","f62defd3-7975-4edf-8f34-40a36b487ac8","f6e3366d-13bc-4a60-94b6-f77a2c2032c0","f75dd4aa-d0bc-4078-857d-76a41f9df08f","fa1e38b4-4ced-4f4b-9a7b-b1b89ff13da7","fb4d21e7-be93-4775-905f-977427db28c4","fc91133d-e4b6-4458-8d6c-cb1af7bcd97e","fdc662ec-5ed7-4d04-8993-6144ff01abc2","fe4e9bc0-2802-4dd8-97e4-27704fad2a1b","fec4e8d2-6a2f-4046-b9d4-85a831f76655","oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0","oil-156fd0980ec51fe6","oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-7269f661e72c703f","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-7ced813eb9eb1314","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-846611108e27fafb","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-a882a3e8b7aeb487","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-ce4031737a7654b3","oil-d276b566dce62194","oil-d479413f1e610f85","oil-e72f16ac2686175c","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-fc5474312cf8529f","oil-ff34df409a4806f1"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["alleged"]},{"id":"claim_statuses:entry:unconfirmed-or-qualified-finding:suspected","name":"Suspected","definition":"A concrete event is reported, but the issue remains a suspicion rather than a confirmed result.","occurrences":135,"article_count":128,"event_count":135,"article_ids":["0b5a50e0-df3b-42ea-83c6-80bc16cf39fb","1931e9b4-edf1-42ec-a9c4-00ff0cbcff9a","1ae756d4-675e-4a08-bc7d-ba6a3e922d5d","1c8fe57c-2cee-4f73-a5f3-6ee4051024e7","23ff1efe-782a-4174-8f33-41a3ff0e8c44","292b562c-132b-47cc-9030-d2544e801e7e","2fc5c9f1-64d2-498f-8f7a-96d94b926f6d","368930a7-2085-43bd-bb79-62d471c9e75c","394a5ff5-76f3-4885-87ed-4a6879611c22","438c4f31-19bd-4ff3-bed4-035569ec6cbf","43de8661-2844-46b7-bb39-15eb17f6b82e","46441742-607f-484f-80fe-b1334048144a","4726ed7e-d61a-4a2c-9e05-59cbaa4f1bf0","4a021f95-539e-4217-98a0-d651be9a3b47","58163259-bc87-4025-a6cc-f3a0848b52cf","6f00035b-1437-428d-895c-a234866e29e0","7855cb39-b177-4d3b-bd72-0a18afd5415b","95044e07-ad37-43f6-95b0-cebe1e9f8ce0","96621df7-0c9b-41e5-a5a6-3f21a24613d5","980db746-8492-4784-ab7e-f6c3b10378e1","9fe3b91d-3719-4260-926a-d5711bd1efc4","a18ba308-f8ab-4590-b466-daf80aa2b59c","a7002128-c4bc-48cd-bed1-46a529e69132","add15855-56e0-4264-819c-b8e8110846aa","b3b632d3-bab8-43e4-9749-51b79e59f7dd","b4a8aa1a-7262-4318-9579-9fff20f959a6","c349f006-e1f4-498e-970a-626a724e2231","d3c6617c-2925-40b2-aa72-9b0b6c5e83d4","df6dd614-6785-4c3a-b6c7-1e091a751c64","e6d36e44-00e2-4f9e-95b1-e892e44117eb","e6f33250-4650-42ce-96e8-87ce7eebc853","eb84cbb3-24d1-4565-9ec1-8bd3b9d4bec9","f1f602c9-64cd-4bfc-855c-fb8060a9c483","f40851bc-e6e8-4605-ba83-f44d932b4760","f4c53608-9890-4b9f-89a3-7c1028bc1e05","faaca14c-514a-4f25-897a-cd9bbc31d5d0","oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-055a850c7fce9512","oil-05aa031a4b58524e","oil-06d5928124689ba0","oil-081117bbf714a215","oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-0d7b13a282f9b466","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","oil-1852e8a212bd5903","oil-1c3f4e35a1252449","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-23d97461886d2622","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-42c4efcdce45e35d","oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-438415c185832786","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-4b88eb2520f8cc22","oil-4bd4c6831e9c7077","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-5413f17944743156","oil-63426d939d718e7f","oil-63f43befc46e25fa","oil-66b89ef48f4536a9","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-7ed3f9582cae741d","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-86a403aef71f924e","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-8e1ede70f7533502","oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77","oil-94951aba738c80b3","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-9c21da748413e6f9","oil-9f582ea75e0eddfb","oil-a0831d014f72baf3","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-a9685f88d15906f6","oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-b434a85e1e9196d0","oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-c0e8fd0149fa83c4","oil-c1a2f95596a3b00d","oil-c2fa50179af284f7","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-c4d815318f8299b0","oil-c72d68cafd2478be","oil-c94e003c369b3450","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-e1cd585e16b9635b","oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f1693a0670f7b784","oil-f5b6386895404f0b","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-f96a10806285c261","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-fba2e5ff157abb74","oil-fc714f38909e4348","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","oil-fcda56b4bb45ffd3","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["suspected"]},{"id":"claim_statuses:entry:unconfirmed-or-qualified-finding:pending-test","name":"Pending test","definition":"The target product has been sent for testing and no final result is reported.","occurrences":81,"article_count":53,"event_count":81,"article_ids":["05937ca4-de64-422f-ba56-878f6152027c","0a113e2a-26d3-45e4-9064-7cfa2f39230b","0e464dfa-d504-4806-9005-c1ba38758bf8","0f7493be-b335-4851-9029-9e87ba0da155","1de65c17-36dd-4ba6-ada6-bcd98b556aad","2679a7a3-abde-4979-ac6e-5cf24113e0db","26b11917-4e55-41d5-aeb1-64e8b44bedba","2c075e82-3fe3-4b95-a68a-f0fad41e51f5","31f1f824-c698-4b97-a52a-1a1136a9ac6e","336a89c4-d98a-4242-8803-4d479689bc4d","3797cfc4-05a5-422b-b823-ed3bb850f540","38d24327-d93d-472b-99ac-246351c7dbfd","39a9fb26-817d-404e-a150-4e4c5ebc037c","411b1d1a-7b18-4425-90f0-da2c296625eb","4260e03f-c3cd-480c-827c-7ebe3a09e913","4299b01d-c5ab-4283-ae2d-31aa1fdbbfec","432f2c6e-3092-44cd-bf1b-54249b31ad6b","4469e268-1b01-49b7-a436-ea4a88ba6269","484a6113-0a95-4624-8291-c00710260e4d","5118358f-2777-4bfd-a761-adb4bc1da763","5374dadc-cd7f-41df-b8d9-8ef7c10ec693","64902247-dbff-448d-987f-c89ac2e30538","67c4a0dd-5f32-4dde-b733-4a4a9e5dfafb","6a44ea24-a3bf-4ad8-96b1-5ae56cefb84c","6cf864fb-5956-4416-a1c5-f42153e66ec4","79cfeedd-0cef-4026-962d-c86d241c4e56","7a59b547-cf09-4b46-bbfe-d7a7f34b7cfc","7c914cb3-8ba1-4768-ac56-a051b75a6e8b","8e0f3d53-2c44-474d-9787-4713b7050c28","92b301e8-97fb-47a7-94a6-b858beb0a1fb","944709d1-19c5-461e-a509-d35f5314cc8e","948eda84-20a8-442d-8a0a-ffba051904a4","9849e210-d94b-448b-885e-7bdffe11cfe9","9bd6a50e-945d-42d4-88de-97e83b4c3b06","abb94f1c-6bf3-442d-9749-eacc170b025c","aed9cf49-b6d3-4952-8acb-37e1eae1c31a","b77861f3-9e86-4450-a13f-4522abb6a8ef","c66f7c07-f922-4abd-8805-71a0fade560f","c6dcef79-69bf-47eb-a0b5-7b4d6bef00fc","d11fa038-1162-4d93-9df5-6d5b35b8628b","d20d6d55-e1d9-462f-902a-31987fc17f06","d96f8ae8-4753-4f7b-9ec5-3238eca05841","e4aba04c-81ff-438c-a506-881ff2436c82","eac2c9bd-6ddc-48dc-92e0-405c318acfb0","f121b53e-c2bd-4ce5-878c-fd5a64863273","f1ba13f7-7414-47ce-9df3-a6aa0902c1b9","f5876a8c-263e-4134-a5b2-ba2453ed9080","f9720bd0-18fb-4774-96e6-eca25490f73e","ff092982-3b6e-4f4c-8194-6b8201ee1246","ff4c3069-118e-4f08-aa39-6394130a8ec4","oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["pending_test"]},{"id":"claim_statuses:entry:unconfirmed-or-qualified-finding:recall-triggered","name":"Recall triggered","definition":"A recall or withdrawal action establishes the public claim status.","occurrences":20,"article_count":14,"event_count":20,"article_ids":["178d6244-50cd-4bea-8e16-f951f6227a8c","1a066d87-0093-4ca8-9c10-84c004b76c48","1b74e29d-f583-4ee4-96bc-e93553c915b3","268e5866-7aea-4546-934f-f105a70b1096","58c8e8bf-9cbd-46dd-8a8b-b1b5cbb0d58d","696bb9a6-aa69-4de4-a566-5df21482bc51","77ed2567-2595-48f0-891b-a753164f2866","8eb102f2-a097-496b-8975-3d2cd6e31a8d","e500f58c-3afd-4143-b4d2-f60500bf9023","ec990258-7999-4c93-81af-59b6ab2c65df","f0a80593-3eca-497d-afa0-90d16a414e1d","f58af8d2-a271-4586-b2b4-1b399c9f84de","fa93085f-260f-4f91-af1c-c85c03ca06fa","fee252e0-d871-44c1-8917-1fd2d148377a"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["recall_triggered"]},{"id":"claim_statuses:entry:unconfirmed-or-qualified-finding:unclear","name":"Unclear","definition":"The available evidence does not establish one more specific status.","occurrences":4,"article_count":4,"event_count":4,"article_ids":["oil-13fd5c31e278a577","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-bd1df718191f8f6e"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["unclear"]}]},{"id":"claim_statuses:group:confirmed-finding","name":"Confirmed finding","definition":"Claims presented as supported by a reported laboratory result.","occurrences":19,"article_count":17,"event_count":19,"article_ids":["2b442757-da6a-46e5-ae37-b083e00062d3","301bb818-ff44-4346-9ffe-ad58bf13cfb2","4eb18b90-e310-48db-9531-68b146420749","51a534c1-9193-4b8c-bbd2-b4e368930ead","5245dc0a-5d68-4a00-ad89-6255f3bee930","55552c00-e696-4ac2-951e-156364cb1337","71196507-ad87-406f-a4df-edc8a14b1575","7a707681-5edc-461c-b5a8-0057a374f3cc","9285d418-e4e3-40a1-b1d1-da857748bfd3","b6a4c3c9-311e-4a4f-beaf-d0012bbfbf51","cd235f2c-1119-4002-b756-61e2983b0232","dc9b6179-78d1-4eec-9df7-47aadc6c4002","e57d61a5-e3ec-423d-ad96-243fbfae502b","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"entries":[{"id":"claim_statuses:entry:confirmed-finding:lab-confirmed","name":"Lab confirmed","definition":"A laboratory result is reported as confirming the finding.","occurrences":19,"article_count":17,"event_count":19,"article_ids":["2b442757-da6a-46e5-ae37-b083e00062d3","301bb818-ff44-4346-9ffe-ad58bf13cfb2","4eb18b90-e310-48db-9531-68b146420749","51a534c1-9193-4b8c-bbd2-b4e368930ead","5245dc0a-5d68-4a00-ad89-6255f3bee930","55552c00-e696-4ac2-951e-156364cb1337","71196507-ad87-406f-a4df-edc8a14b1575","7a707681-5edc-461c-b5a8-0057a374f3cc","9285d418-e4e3-40a1-b1d1-da857748bfd3","b6a4c3c9-311e-4a4f-beaf-d0012bbfbf51","cd235f2c-1119-4002-b756-61e2983b0232","dc9b6179-78d1-4eec-9df7-47aadc6c4002","e57d61a5-e3ec-423d-ad96-243fbfae502b","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["lab_confirmed"]}]}]},{"id":"regulatory_actions","label":"Regulatory actions","description":"Reported enforcement, inspection, seizure, legal, or administrative actions.","groups":[{"id":"regulatory_actions:group:investigation-and-administration","name":"Investigation and administration","definition":"Investigations, inquiries, committees, referrals, and administrative directions.","occurrences":294,"article_count":230,"event_count":258,"article_ids":["008cc0e4-d7d7-475f-80d8-d81621e7b862","030df41e-ccfc-4023-a026-89cc92bf3253","03ea9124-befd-4983-bcdc-147e3ed3bf73","05375704-5b45-4e0a-b388-9944c0c5fc9f","0932679a-fe82-4a1e-949e-9d4fd17ed2a0","0a113e2a-26d3-45e4-9064-7cfa2f39230b","0a342064-5378-4aff-b4aa-34ae5c1ab66b","0aa842b8-1ac9-4243-a8b6-5d98d32d6089","0af3703f-23ec-4f8f-a1b6-45b4adb68b12","0b5a50e0-df3b-42ea-83c6-80bc16cf39fb","0d14295d-a954-4163-8974-ecb51bd464e8","0d96e6b1-57f6-4555-8711-703a6c818eea","0e464dfa-d504-4806-9005-c1ba38758bf8","0e518ac8-dc53-4c79-938a-bd26c1142eeb","0ef4d3e4-844c-47ee-a430-8f171ec4c000","0f7493be-b335-4851-9029-9e87ba0da155","102a4953-33a2-4842-827e-987e3bb6ce7a","141518ef-ce68-4969-bb2a-66f56733fab2","178d6244-50cd-4bea-8e16-f951f6227a8c","1933f8f5-8812-4e24-85bd-cdbdc83f929e","1a806023-ac1d-4da2-924e-25821c2554f5","1a87f314-ec7e-4407-96f2-0995e8d26fc0","1addfba0-b7e9-4722-85be-a642cdf63571","1b1069d2-3f50-4dd3-a8bd-0aeed6bacf98","1bb0d3e5-6f04-4d91-a899-8b6f59bc228a","1de4a13b-1497-421e-b5bc-a8ebbc7a3b18","1de65c17-36dd-4ba6-ada6-bcd98b556aad","1df33743-1016-49ce-981b-862125c0893f","1e6b9f5b-a065-4242-ae58-1f105455955f","1fe9639d-5c39-472e-94a7-73ac2b03bfce","2010c6e2-c9cb-4a3e-b22b-8cabf1044074","22261df7-8974-447f-a1cf-192c59528f64","2255e304-d6ef-4707-b594-cbc3955019ec","23ff1efe-782a-4174-8f33-41a3ff0e8c44","2499d49c-748f-41d8-84d9-eed7a66ad43a","2679a7a3-abde-4979-ac6e-5cf24113e0db","26ac5726-fd69-42b8-a80e-6a71b91ba466","29a173b3-4587-4257-9c93-2f0c483079c5","2a59f77c-89ba-49fe-be6c-b3c9756a9940","2fc5c9f1-64d2-498f-8f7a-96d94b926f6d","301bb818-ff44-4346-9ffe-ad58bf13cfb2","3278338f-1fa0-4045-9701-e237d5ad0930","3282adec-c328-4317-a091-a126587d78de","32bc8e29-1313-4d9b-86ff-8c3bb665f057","33326887-4ed0-4562-a0ac-b889d6ad53a9","34b8b88f-e283-46cd-ba6e-f373dc3d4395","3624ed70-d464-4caa-9b4e-4dfc2ed435dc","368930a7-2085-43bd-bb79-62d471c9e75c","3797cfc4-05a5-422b-b823-ed3bb850f540","3865528e-cbb8-4615-af7d-f9ab01e9fe4d","3911de79-cbfd-4eaa-9311-207b452faa93","39a9fb26-817d-404e-a150-4e4c5ebc037c","39e61860-2a60-448c-838e-a7f01e4d0c5c","3e325b99-7611-4f89-8963-7f79c5ac4105","4260e03f-c3cd-480c-827c-7ebe3a09e913","432f2c6e-3092-44cd-bf1b-54249b31ad6b","43e20f96-27cb-4f67-b7e5-6228aea8e7b6","445ff19b-5429-4a55-be3f-c4b03481b04f","46441742-607f-484f-80fe-b1334048144a","4661fe17-e88d-41ab-a8c6-9aefcbbaed5c","47635cd8-696c-4adf-94ed-338f084a3d62","484a6113-0a95-4624-8291-c00710260e4d","4c67d899-fab5-4e78-9274-526d6a4fe0bb","502ff9a1-ac00-4ef2-96cb-0a0614085766","5245dc0a-5d68-4a00-ad89-6255f3bee930","534ab39c-32c3-46ea-a742-5095170a0003","5374dadc-cd7f-41df-b8d9-8ef7c10ec693","53f8ec9a-900f-481f-bfb5-a6ca452416ed","5406e730-2d78-47b4-ba27-fc933e691eab","54637d34-f16e-4e98-84c1-681a0fca559c","554708da-6872-4a1b-91cc-3beeb59fbf2e","55552c00-e696-4ac2-951e-156364cb1337","5710a503-9fbe-46ae-abd5-2663069b70db","58163259-bc87-4025-a6cc-f3a0848b52cf","58679f65-396b-4b1f-b725-9907ebc9f038","58ac029e-4204-42c4-8ff3-6dbd84dd382a","590fff58-7ba9-4a5b-8232-4c27d67f13b1","5c86116b-5fae-45a9-b467-01fc8b26a166","5d222c9b-8733-4d3b-abaa-59f77da35546","5f6c5fd0-a2f8-4bfe-9ac4-a8d06bc8640a","5fa4530c-d60b-48c1-b6b2-371abff6d77a","60ccacb1-7c41-4259-b651-bfbf60e7b53a","6135126e-45b3-4fe7-a80f-82248b08ea7b","6411a3a1-2932-41eb-b497-f9a2400de74c","64902247-dbff-448d-987f-c89ac2e30538","672ecfdb-cb9d-485d-8fc1-76e6a8269fe7","6901ef7b-f98a-4b3a-b622-85196fe10ffb","6ab671c9-310c-4d88-bd88-0251180b2345","6ee56cf3-78f2-4420-bede-08f76397b2fb","706246bb-b5c8-4d73-81fa-2e93d040c762","706f0136-7ae5-45f2-b804-e3a8c9a14d1c","71196507-ad87-406f-a4df-edc8a14b1575","73066633-67a8-4240-8c5a-3c4ae29b486d","73369c4a-c44b-4b7a-b3cc-07766ccb4e2a","73e97a89-5b5f-4104-bc6a-50b8f564040a","747400a0-bfad-4fa2-8004-06f237d1c543","75eac450-5d76-45da-975a-a47f1515ca01","77ed2567-2595-48f0-891b-a753164f2866","7a539249-77a2-4e2b-a29f-6952304d80d7","7a59b547-cf09-4b46-bbfe-d7a7f34b7cfc","7a707681-5edc-461c-b5a8-0057a374f3cc","7b3b345d-0902-4461-a6bc-747c26feb7f2","8151434e-f600-47a9-93df-16b483e88961","815dcb75-691c-4066-a898-b7ed46fdbdf2","81b21166-1d16-4aec-910f-b382f9680f5f","81f9e1b1-71fd-45a2-9292-017420336059","824601ea-5309-4ddf-bc61-486c992e309c","835cbabf-d424-4f04-89cb-1d8c0b08f1ab","83bf777b-6ee5-4e82-bd85-6e374853473a","84512e93-e51a-4c89-88dd-ecc2afc0699a","85680853-3899-4f21-b262-dbe3e8893779","8577ca11-d1ef-4517-846f-747a51b46f07","892c7a97-bb6b-47a5-9402-8a5293acf25b","8b1ef2e6-f7a2-4db0-9589-42159cf06574","8d8b9ba9-5da4-4861-89db-348400c8ef68","8e0f3d53-2c44-474d-9787-4713b7050c28","8e4f2f4a-8039-4ba0-9b6d-beecad106136","8eb102f2-a097-496b-8975-3d2cd6e31a8d","8ecfae6d-fb77-4dfe-9f9b-f1425d8a13da","8ef8782e-cc91-4ddc-95d5-d260f1b7a518","9285d418-e4e3-40a1-b1d1-da857748bfd3","93c87fee-61ec-4ea8-bd4f-3434669835ee","93ec7040-a06c-4da5-b0b1-626399456a8a","948eda84-20a8-442d-8a0a-ffba051904a4","95044e07-ad37-43f6-95b0-cebe1e9f8ce0","95b8351c-9ddb-457d-9035-ad3b6d181dc7","96adc5c1-5a68-473e-9d38-85bed792c8fc","9c74f902-2ef0-4269-b436-acc19aa11ea5","9d92713b-a9c4-4b7e-87f4-c4fd443e38b5","9f454843-a34c-4619-a576-493f835993b4","9fe3b91d-3719-4260-926a-d5711bd1efc4","a06cd968-9dc5-42c5-a6e8-3d3c36dfc8c2","a3ce7cd2-ee71-42ce-b4f7-96a81c6bd295","a45c3495-d077-4241-b1d7-72fa109d0e6b","a7cc57e8-71f7-4536-ba7c-452e09344a18","ac5e071a-48a2-4a53-a1f6-5fc7b6d35280","adad636e-6844-49cb-bb07-54ff4f1a044f","aec84261-126b-4386-b0f4-15f160ca67ae","aed9cf49-b6d3-4952-8acb-37e1eae1c31a","b293dea5-f7e1-4889-a56d-f823569cdff4","b4b614f7-a43d-4e57-9766-25f7fef90d68","b77861f3-9e86-4450-a13f-4522abb6a8ef","bc813ec4-3453-4fe2-a5d0-884fdb51bfc7","bcd183c8-344e-4cb8-8561-8c2e6a027897","bcd80071-6449-4036-accf-62939d2bc771","bdc8358e-29a2-4efa-a99e-6023a27df35b","c0981bc0-6d81-46d5-a2fc-715c6a5662b8","c2853c18-cc20-43b6-bd36-3b77725ba1d7","c2875090-e4c1-4cec-be8a-7218c8774f6b","c5597192-fe4a-479a-8bf7-cdcf15d74d10","c66f7c07-f922-4abd-8805-71a0fade560f","c6e6e3f3-bc85-48dc-ad18-bb08d31d7308","c7589046-9f75-46b4-bd78-c3fe0703df52","c7af7c66-9a6d-42c8-8695-bcd164ed856b","c999d71f-777d-4d80-9f37-37391f97acd4","cb333cad-a0a7-4971-8f06-e4ca49e58c39","cbdf7850-c12b-44e7-9a2a-2e88994f389f","cddf4a6a-4d4e-4d8b-9631-734b807f7215","ce0c52be-896a-479c-b92b-09bf3518d332","cf1f664f-fab8-46ef-9768-c3fc897d3913","cf35dad3-c846-4c5e-91db-577efd256f78","cfa001c3-f0fc-45cd-8a71-3e35d2026e1f","d11fa038-1162-4d93-9df5-6d5b35b8628b","d156577c-5001-4f1b-90f7-d7b21a37497b","d18985ea-8239-498e-9147-eda1d0bb8bde","d20d6d55-e1d9-462f-902a-31987fc17f06","d2c92cf6-2a73-4e89-adff-db3cb523f8e1","d3bd5582-331f-4b89-96d8-d988dabaecd2","d3c6617c-2925-40b2-aa72-9b0b6c5e83d4","d405b9b8-3fd3-4230-a3d3-ccdd34abd185","d5ff3294-0ecd-48eb-b9dd-a2c0282a055a","d6f9dd1e-cee9-48ff-a7e7-71d7a7b8f61d","d8ab6193-0742-4b7e-99ea-f1131b5fc36f","dab486f0-dfe1-46a8-b0d8-32e2a200b8e8","dc0f107c-d6af-40f2-b8fd-d6a8264071a5","dc9b6179-78d1-4eec-9df7-47aadc6c4002","dd99547d-81d1-4764-ba78-52a1cddf906d","ddada193-97b9-4ccc-8a51-bfbea77a0c06","e06bafea-36a4-40ac-8e47-2a2619fd46fd","e1955bc5-123d-4ca0-b875-2d75b1f718f1","e256486b-ee32-4d0f-9cba-d02bf4bd780a","e2a4561f-b8bf-4ca9-9990-3b885eaf5c2b","e2f38cc3-06ff-4db2-8aad-a537c1e1d0c8","e446ef0a-2a74-42bf-bcd6-2b793506650e","e53f3cca-ca53-449c-9f09-737f317fb169","e57d61a5-e3ec-423d-ad96-243fbfae502b","e6e7e00b-0ede-4741-8419-066a93e431cd","e7a8eb39-66a7-4777-a0d6-cfb00f8f0798","e8fbbd18-0c64-4437-9ea9-4b4877081943","e9029bad-f0af-4178-8545-61b8bf20d98f","ea0bba2c-7a56-40f2-afac-00f638b54fc3","ea27969f-7a0b-4e5c-9893-7763d5fdbfbf","eac2c9bd-6ddc-48dc-92e0-405c318acfb0","eb7f5240-b11f-4c58-9681-91c05d2c3f50","edf6b48c-90dc-4757-814e-999556997808","eec20343-5ffa-486c-b431-59ca5e4568d4","f0a80593-3eca-497d-afa0-90d16a414e1d","f121b53e-c2bd-4ce5-878c-fd5a64863273","f19a484a-77bd-4389-8266-523228328091","f1ba13f7-7414-47ce-9df3-a6aa0902c1b9","f25f2d19-18b4-4e7e-ad7b-8f30a193b3d6","f267ac1f-eff8-417a-8920-f8d37e384f79","f289c668-0c40-41e6-82af-ae6829b262d4","f40851bc-e6e8-4605-ba83-f44d932b4760","f502d85e-d523-4b8c-9dec-469aa08204df","f5876a8c-263e-4134-a5b2-ba2453ed9080","f58af8d2-a271-4586-b2b4-1b399c9f84de","f5c77efa-f72b-424c-a810-81cd552ba3de","f75dd4aa-d0bc-4078-857d-76a41f9df08f","fa1e38b4-4ced-4f4b-9a7b-b1b89ff13da7","fa93085f-260f-4f91-af1c-c85c03ca06fa","fc91133d-e4b6-4458-8d6c-cb1af7bcd97e","fe4e9bc0-2802-4dd8-97e4-27704fad2a1b","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-846611108e27fafb","oil-86a403aef71f924e","oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f5b6386895404f0b","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-fc5474312cf8529f","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"entries":[{"id":"regulatory_actions:entry:investigation-and-administration:other-reported-action","name":"Other reported action","definition":"A normalized regulatory actions concept combining 145 extracted labels.","occurrences":219,"article_count":178,"event_count":203,"article_ids":["008cc0e4-d7d7-475f-80d8-d81621e7b862","030df41e-ccfc-4023-a026-89cc92bf3253","03ea9124-befd-4983-bcdc-147e3ed3bf73","05375704-5b45-4e0a-b388-9944c0c5fc9f","0932679a-fe82-4a1e-949e-9d4fd17ed2a0","0a113e2a-26d3-45e4-9064-7cfa2f39230b","0aa842b8-1ac9-4243-a8b6-5d98d32d6089","0af3703f-23ec-4f8f-a1b6-45b4adb68b12","0b5a50e0-df3b-42ea-83c6-80bc16cf39fb","0d14295d-a954-4163-8974-ecb51bd464e8","0d96e6b1-57f6-4555-8711-703a6c818eea","0e464dfa-d504-4806-9005-c1ba38758bf8","0e518ac8-dc53-4c79-938a-bd26c1142eeb","0ef4d3e4-844c-47ee-a430-8f171ec4c000","0f7493be-b335-4851-9029-9e87ba0da155","102a4953-33a2-4842-827e-987e3bb6ce7a","178d6244-50cd-4bea-8e16-f951f6227a8c","1933f8f5-8812-4e24-85bd-cdbdc83f929e","1a806023-ac1d-4da2-924e-25821c2554f5","1a87f314-ec7e-4407-96f2-0995e8d26fc0","1addfba0-b7e9-4722-85be-a642cdf63571","1b1069d2-3f50-4dd3-a8bd-0aeed6bacf98","1bb0d3e5-6f04-4d91-a899-8b6f59bc228a","1de65c17-36dd-4ba6-ada6-bcd98b556aad","1df33743-1016-49ce-981b-862125c0893f","1e6b9f5b-a065-4242-ae58-1f105455955f","2010c6e2-c9cb-4a3e-b22b-8cabf1044074","22261df7-8974-447f-a1cf-192c59528f64","2255e304-d6ef-4707-b594-cbc3955019ec","23ff1efe-782a-4174-8f33-41a3ff0e8c44","2499d49c-748f-41d8-84d9-eed7a66ad43a","29a173b3-4587-4257-9c93-2f0c483079c5","2a59f77c-89ba-49fe-be6c-b3c9756a9940","2fc5c9f1-64d2-498f-8f7a-96d94b926f6d","301bb818-ff44-4346-9ffe-ad58bf13cfb2","3278338f-1fa0-4045-9701-e237d5ad0930","33326887-4ed0-4562-a0ac-b889d6ad53a9","34b8b88f-e283-46cd-ba6e-f373dc3d4395","3624ed70-d464-4caa-9b4e-4dfc2ed435dc","368930a7-2085-43bd-bb79-62d471c9e75c","3797cfc4-05a5-422b-b823-ed3bb850f540","3865528e-cbb8-4615-af7d-f9ab01e9fe4d","3911de79-cbfd-4eaa-9311-207b452faa93","39a9fb26-817d-404e-a150-4e4c5ebc037c","39e61860-2a60-448c-838e-a7f01e4d0c5c","4260e03f-c3cd-480c-827c-7ebe3a09e913","43e20f96-27cb-4f67-b7e5-6228aea8e7b6","46441742-607f-484f-80fe-b1334048144a","484a6113-0a95-4624-8291-c00710260e4d","4c67d899-fab5-4e78-9274-526d6a4fe0bb","502ff9a1-ac00-4ef2-96cb-0a0614085766","5245dc0a-5d68-4a00-ad89-6255f3bee930","534ab39c-32c3-46ea-a742-5095170a0003","5374dadc-cd7f-41df-b8d9-8ef7c10ec693","53f8ec9a-900f-481f-bfb5-a6ca452416ed","5406e730-2d78-47b4-ba27-fc933e691eab","54637d34-f16e-4e98-84c1-681a0fca559c","554708da-6872-4a1b-91cc-3beeb59fbf2e","55552c00-e696-4ac2-951e-156364cb1337","5710a503-9fbe-46ae-abd5-2663069b70db","58163259-bc87-4025-a6cc-f3a0848b52cf","58679f65-396b-4b1f-b725-9907ebc9f038","58ac029e-4204-42c4-8ff3-6dbd84dd382a","590fff58-7ba9-4a5b-8232-4c27d67f13b1","5c86116b-5fae-45a9-b467-01fc8b26a166","5d222c9b-8733-4d3b-abaa-59f77da35546","5f6c5fd0-a2f8-4bfe-9ac4-a8d06bc8640a","5fa4530c-d60b-48c1-b6b2-371abff6d77a","60ccacb1-7c41-4259-b651-bfbf60e7b53a","6135126e-45b3-4fe7-a80f-82248b08ea7b","6411a3a1-2932-41eb-b497-f9a2400de74c","672ecfdb-cb9d-485d-8fc1-76e6a8269fe7","6901ef7b-f98a-4b3a-b622-85196fe10ffb","6ab671c9-310c-4d88-bd88-0251180b2345","6ee56cf3-78f2-4420-bede-08f76397b2fb","706f0136-7ae5-45f2-b804-e3a8c9a14d1c","71196507-ad87-406f-a4df-edc8a14b1575","73066633-67a8-4240-8c5a-3c4ae29b486d","73e97a89-5b5f-4104-bc6a-50b8f564040a","747400a0-bfad-4fa2-8004-06f237d1c543","77ed2567-2595-48f0-891b-a753164f2866","7a539249-77a2-4e2b-a29f-6952304d80d7","7a707681-5edc-461c-b5a8-0057a374f3cc","7b3b345d-0902-4461-a6bc-747c26feb7f2","8151434e-f600-47a9-93df-16b483e88961","815dcb75-691c-4066-a898-b7ed46fdbdf2","81b21166-1d16-4aec-910f-b382f9680f5f","81f9e1b1-71fd-45a2-9292-017420336059","824601ea-5309-4ddf-bc61-486c992e309c","84512e93-e51a-4c89-88dd-ecc2afc0699a","85680853-3899-4f21-b262-dbe3e8893779","8577ca11-d1ef-4517-846f-747a51b46f07","892c7a97-bb6b-47a5-9402-8a5293acf25b","8b1ef2e6-f7a2-4db0-9589-42159cf06574","8d8b9ba9-5da4-4861-89db-348400c8ef68","8e0f3d53-2c44-474d-9787-4713b7050c28","8eb102f2-a097-496b-8975-3d2cd6e31a8d","9285d418-e4e3-40a1-b1d1-da857748bfd3","93c87fee-61ec-4ea8-bd4f-3434669835ee","948eda84-20a8-442d-8a0a-ffba051904a4","95044e07-ad37-43f6-95b0-cebe1e9f8ce0","95b8351c-9ddb-457d-9035-ad3b6d181dc7","96adc5c1-5a68-473e-9d38-85bed792c8fc","9c74f902-2ef0-4269-b436-acc19aa11ea5","9f454843-a34c-4619-a576-493f835993b4","9fe3b91d-3719-4260-926a-d5711bd1efc4","a06cd968-9dc5-42c5-a6e8-3d3c36dfc8c2","a45c3495-d077-4241-b1d7-72fa109d0e6b","ac5e071a-48a2-4a53-a1f6-5fc7b6d35280","adad636e-6844-49cb-bb07-54ff4f1a044f","aec84261-126b-4386-b0f4-15f160ca67ae","aed9cf49-b6d3-4952-8acb-37e1eae1c31a","b293dea5-f7e1-4889-a56d-f823569cdff4","b4b614f7-a43d-4e57-9766-25f7fef90d68","bc813ec4-3453-4fe2-a5d0-884fdb51bfc7","bcd80071-6449-4036-accf-62939d2bc771","bdc8358e-29a2-4efa-a99e-6023a27df35b","c0981bc0-6d81-46d5-a2fc-715c6a5662b8","c2875090-e4c1-4cec-be8a-7218c8774f6b","c5597192-fe4a-479a-8bf7-cdcf15d74d10","c66f7c07-f922-4abd-8805-71a0fade560f","c6e6e3f3-bc85-48dc-ad18-bb08d31d7308","c7589046-9f75-46b4-bd78-c3fe0703df52","c999d71f-777d-4d80-9f37-37391f97acd4","cb333cad-a0a7-4971-8f06-e4ca49e58c39","cbdf7850-c12b-44e7-9a2a-2e88994f389f","ce0c52be-896a-479c-b92b-09bf3518d332","cf35dad3-c846-4c5e-91db-577efd256f78","cfa001c3-f0fc-45cd-8a71-3e35d2026e1f","d11fa038-1162-4d93-9df5-6d5b35b8628b","d156577c-5001-4f1b-90f7-d7b21a37497b","d18985ea-8239-498e-9147-eda1d0bb8bde","d3bd5582-331f-4b89-96d8-d988dabaecd2","d3c6617c-2925-40b2-aa72-9b0b6c5e83d4","d405b9b8-3fd3-4230-a3d3-ccdd34abd185","d5ff3294-0ecd-48eb-b9dd-a2c0282a055a","dab486f0-dfe1-46a8-b0d8-32e2a200b8e8","dc0f107c-d6af-40f2-b8fd-d6a8264071a5","dc9b6179-78d1-4eec-9df7-47aadc6c4002","dd99547d-81d1-4764-ba78-52a1cddf906d","ddada193-97b9-4ccc-8a51-bfbea77a0c06","e06bafea-36a4-40ac-8e47-2a2619fd46fd","e1955bc5-123d-4ca0-b875-2d75b1f718f1","e256486b-ee32-4d0f-9cba-d02bf4bd780a","e2a4561f-b8bf-4ca9-9990-3b885eaf5c2b","e2f38cc3-06ff-4db2-8aad-a537c1e1d0c8","e446ef0a-2a74-42bf-bcd6-2b793506650e","e57d61a5-e3ec-423d-ad96-243fbfae502b","e9029bad-f0af-4178-8545-61b8bf20d98f","ea27969f-7a0b-4e5c-9893-7763d5fdbfbf","eac2c9bd-6ddc-48dc-92e0-405c318acfb0","edf6b48c-90dc-4757-814e-999556997808","eec20343-5ffa-486c-b431-59ca5e4568d4","f0a80593-3eca-497d-afa0-90d16a414e1d","f121b53e-c2bd-4ce5-878c-fd5a64863273","f19a484a-77bd-4389-8266-523228328091","f1ba13f7-7414-47ce-9df3-a6aa0902c1b9","f25f2d19-18b4-4e7e-ad7b-8f30a193b3d6","f267ac1f-eff8-417a-8920-f8d37e384f79","f289c668-0c40-41e6-82af-ae6829b262d4","f40851bc-e6e8-4605-ba83-f44d932b4760","f5876a8c-263e-4134-a5b2-ba2453ed9080","f58af8d2-a271-4586-b2b4-1b399c9f84de","f75dd4aa-d0bc-4078-857d-76a41f9df08f","fa1e38b4-4ced-4f4b-9a7b-b1b89ff13da7","fa93085f-260f-4f91-af1c-c85c03ca06fa","fc91133d-e4b6-4458-8d6c-cb1af7bcd97e","fe4e9bc0-2802-4dd8-97e4-27704fad2a1b","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f5b6386895404f0b","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-fc5474312cf8529f","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"ontology_types":["closure","enforcement_action","fflo:Action","fflo:EnforcementAction","fflo:InstructionToCorrect","fflo:LegalAction","fflo:RegulatoryAction","fkg:Action","fkg:RegulatoryAction","fso:RegulatoryAction","licence_cancellation_proceedings","recall","regulatory_action"],"aliases":["action sought","Action will be initiated soon","adding accused","administrative action","adulterate ghee for Tirupati laddus","adulterated ghee was made by mixing ingredients such as palm oil, palm kernel oil and palmolein.","adulteration","adulteration detected","adulteration_finding","allegation","alleged","anticipatory bail sought","apprehended","arraignment","asset freeze","asset_freeze","asset_freezing","bail opposition","bail petition","bail plea dismissed","bail_opposition","bail_plea_adjourned","Bhole Baba Organic Dairy was blacklisted by TTD in 2022 following complaints of irregularities","blacklist","blacklisted supplier","blacklisting","blacklisting and penalising the supplier","blacklisting of all erring suppliers","blacklisting of contractor","board meeting to discuss findings","busted a counterfeit racket","Campaign to curb adulteration in desi ghee and butter","case registered","case_registered","charge sheet","charge sheet filed","charge sheet filing","charge-sheet filed","charge-sheet filing","charge_sheet_filed","chargesheet","chargesheet filed","chargesheet filing","chargesheet_filed","chargesheet_filing","chemicals such as beta carotene, acetic acid ester, ghee flavour and other adulterants were used","chemicals such as beta carotene, acetic acid ester, ghee flavour and other adulterants were used to adjust lab test values and maintain aroma in the adulterated ghee","complaint","complaint filed","complaint_filed","constitution of an SIT","constitution of SIT","contract cancellation","contractor blacklisted","cost of 2 lakh","court hearing","court proceedings","court_hearing","criminal cases","custodial interrogation","custodial questioning","debate in assembly","destroyed","destruction","destruction of oil","detained","discarding_unsafe_loose_ghee","disciplinary action","disciplinary and administrative action","disqualification","Disqualification of vendors","entrust to Commission of Enquiry","external_testing","factory busted","filing of charge sheet","formation of SIT","freeze assets","Ghee blended with palm oil, palmolein, palm kernel oil, beta-carotene, acetic acid ester and ghee-flavouring agents continued entering TTD stores and was used in laddu preparation until 2024.","ghee was prepared without using milk and was adulterated with animal fat","ghee was reportedly blended with chemicals like beta-carotene, acetic acid ester, and artificial ghee flavour","ghee was reportedly blended with palm oil, palm kernel oil, and palmolein","instruction to procure labelled products","instruction_to_correct","interrogation","judicial remand","lab_setup","lab_test","licence_cancellation_proceedings","license cancellation","license cancellation proceedings","license_cancellation","life imprisonment","mandatory fatty acid profile test","manhunt","manufacture of adulterated ghee by Bhole Baba","manufacturing","market withdrawal","medical observation","medical treatment","micro-DNA testing is essential to establish the complete truth in the laddu ghee adulteration case","mixing adulterants such as palm oil, palm kernel oil and palmolein","money laundering case","naming of accused","official transferred","pending criminal complaint","Police case registered","police complaint","police complaint filed","police complaint lodged","police_complaint","protest","public advisories","public alert","questioning","recall","recalled","rejection of anticipatory bail","report submission","report_filed","reports of fake ghee being busted at trusted stores","return of four ghee tankers","returned to supplier","selling","shut down","SIT chargesheet clearly mentioned the mixing of animal fat in the ghee","SIT constituted","SIT constitution","SIT formation","SIT_constitution","special drives","stop sale order","strict action","strict actions under relevant provisions of the Food Safety and Standards Act","summons","supplied approximately 68 lakh kilograms of ghee","supply","suppression","tested","testing","tests conducted by the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) found the presence of animal fat in the ghee","The SIT is yet to investigate in depth into the issue.","transfer of Anil Kumar Singhal","transfer_of_officials","uncovered","vigilance squad set up"]},{"id":"regulatory_actions:entry:investigation-and-administration:investigation-or-inquiry","name":"Investigation or inquiry","definition":"A normalized regulatory actions concept combining 23 extracted labels.","occurrences":71,"article_count":69,"event_count":71,"article_ids":["0a342064-5378-4aff-b4aa-34ae5c1ab66b","141518ef-ce68-4969-bb2a-66f56733fab2","1de4a13b-1497-421e-b5bc-a8ebbc7a3b18","1fe9639d-5c39-472e-94a7-73ac2b03bfce","2679a7a3-abde-4979-ac6e-5cf24113e0db","26ac5726-fd69-42b8-a80e-6a71b91ba466","3282adec-c328-4317-a091-a126587d78de","32bc8e29-1313-4d9b-86ff-8c3bb665f057","39a9fb26-817d-404e-a150-4e4c5ebc037c","39e61860-2a60-448c-838e-a7f01e4d0c5c","3e325b99-7611-4f89-8963-7f79c5ac4105","432f2c6e-3092-44cd-bf1b-54249b31ad6b","445ff19b-5429-4a55-be3f-c4b03481b04f","4661fe17-e88d-41ab-a8c6-9aefcbbaed5c","47635cd8-696c-4adf-94ed-338f084a3d62","53f8ec9a-900f-481f-bfb5-a6ca452416ed","5406e730-2d78-47b4-ba27-fc933e691eab","55552c00-e696-4ac2-951e-156364cb1337","5fa4530c-d60b-48c1-b6b2-371abff6d77a","64902247-dbff-448d-987f-c89ac2e30538","6ab671c9-310c-4d88-bd88-0251180b2345","6ee56cf3-78f2-4420-bede-08f76397b2fb","706246bb-b5c8-4d73-81fa-2e93d040c762","73066633-67a8-4240-8c5a-3c4ae29b486d","73369c4a-c44b-4b7a-b3cc-07766ccb4e2a","75eac450-5d76-45da-975a-a47f1515ca01","7a59b547-cf09-4b46-bbfe-d7a7f34b7cfc","7b3b345d-0902-4461-a6bc-747c26feb7f2","835cbabf-d424-4f04-89cb-1d8c0b08f1ab","83bf777b-6ee5-4e82-bd85-6e374853473a","8577ca11-d1ef-4517-846f-747a51b46f07","8e0f3d53-2c44-474d-9787-4713b7050c28","8e4f2f4a-8039-4ba0-9b6d-beecad106136","8ecfae6d-fb77-4dfe-9f9b-f1425d8a13da","8ef8782e-cc91-4ddc-95d5-d260f1b7a518","93c87fee-61ec-4ea8-bd4f-3434669835ee","93ec7040-a06c-4da5-b0b1-626399456a8a","9d92713b-a9c4-4b7e-87f4-c4fd443e38b5","a3ce7cd2-ee71-42ce-b4f7-96a81c6bd295","a7cc57e8-71f7-4536-ba7c-452e09344a18","b77861f3-9e86-4450-a13f-4522abb6a8ef","bcd183c8-344e-4cb8-8561-8c2e6a027897","c0981bc0-6d81-46d5-a2fc-715c6a5662b8","c2853c18-cc20-43b6-bd36-3b77725ba1d7","c5597192-fe4a-479a-8bf7-cdcf15d74d10","c7af7c66-9a6d-42c8-8695-bcd164ed856b","cddf4a6a-4d4e-4d8b-9631-734b807f7215","cf1f664f-fab8-46ef-9768-c3fc897d3913","d156577c-5001-4f1b-90f7-d7b21a37497b","d20d6d55-e1d9-462f-902a-31987fc17f06","d2c92cf6-2a73-4e89-adff-db3cb523f8e1","d6f9dd1e-cee9-48ff-a7e7-71d7a7b8f61d","d8ab6193-0742-4b7e-99ea-f1131b5fc36f","dc9b6179-78d1-4eec-9df7-47aadc6c4002","ddada193-97b9-4ccc-8a51-bfbea77a0c06","e256486b-ee32-4d0f-9cba-d02bf4bd780a","e53f3cca-ca53-449c-9f09-737f317fb169","e6e7e00b-0ede-4741-8419-066a93e431cd","e7a8eb39-66a7-4777-a0d6-cfb00f8f0798","e8fbbd18-0c64-4437-9ea9-4b4877081943","ea0bba2c-7a56-40f2-afac-00f638b54fc3","eb7f5240-b11f-4c58-9681-91c05d2c3f50","f502d85e-d523-4b8c-9dec-469aa08204df","f5c77efa-f72b-424c-a810-81cd552ba3de","f75dd4aa-d0bc-4078-857d-76a41f9df08f","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-86a403aef71f924e","oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d"],"ontology_types":["fflo:RegulatoryAction","fkg:Action","fkg:RegulatoryAction","fso:Action","fso:RegulatoryAction"],"aliases":["case transferred to Special Investigation Team","CBI investigation","CBI probe","CBI probe demanded","committee formation","committee_formation","constituted a one-man committee to determine administrative responsibility","court_inquiry","formation of expert committee","inquiry","inquiry committee formation","investigation","investigation ongoing","investigation_sought","investigation_under_prevention_of_money_laundering_act","probe","SIT probe","SIT probe ordered","SIT probe revealed that adulterated ghee was supplied for the manufacturing of the laddu prasadam at Tirumala.","SIT probe revealed that the adulterated ghee was produced mixing palm oil, palm kernel oil, monoglycerides, Betacarotene, acetic acid ester, and lactic acid.","special investigation team (SIT)","Special Investigation Team investigation","urgent inquiry directive"]},{"id":"regulatory_actions:entry:investigation-and-administration:administrative-direction-or-referral","name":"Administrative direction or referral","definition":"A normalized regulatory actions concept combining 4 extracted labels.","occurrences":4,"article_count":3,"event_count":3,"article_ids":["oil-846611108e27fafb","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-d7ec006e22e070de"],"ontology_types":["fflo:RegulatoryAction"],"aliases":["Directive to Centre on lab expansion","directive to find central govt policy","referred to Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission","written to Ministry of Petroleum and Chemicals"]}]},{"id":"regulatory_actions:group:product-control-measures","name":"Product control measures","definition":"Actions that seize, confiscate, prohibit, or otherwise remove products from circulation.","occurrences":244,"article_count":226,"event_count":241,"article_ids":["0109eea0-3adc-4177-a6f7-e3bc31bf237d","0a23e582-3dac-4091-bf36-a08d511a3763","0aa842b8-1ac9-4243-a8b6-5d98d32d6089","0e518ac8-dc53-4c79-938a-bd26c1142eeb","0ea7c6a7-d2c1-498f-aa00-f3fc942206ed","0f7493be-b335-4851-9029-9e87ba0da155","0facca96-d90c-4f21-ba98-356f7f6b1622","15f9d255-f348-4fb7-ba3d-003ab6adcfb2","164f43df-a069-4197-9854-e7bd9fc78fae","1931e9b4-edf1-42ec-a9c4-00ff0cbcff9a","1a066d87-0093-4ca8-9c10-84c004b76c48","1ae756d4-675e-4a08-bc7d-ba6a3e922d5d","1b74e29d-f583-4ee4-96bc-e93553c915b3","1c8fe57c-2cee-4f73-a5f3-6ee4051024e7","1de4a13b-1497-421e-b5bc-a8ebbc7a3b18","229a7f40-f956-476e-8c84-3fd9ed3d6c29","268e5866-7aea-4546-934f-f105a70b1096","26b11917-4e55-41d5-aeb1-64e8b44bedba","2719a94d-d523-4fef-bfd9-a1bef16dd951","28a03096-e60c-4adb-b4fa-55f0bd28a95d","292b562c-132b-47cc-9030-d2544e801e7e","2ad1f047-985c-4c59-aa13-749fa75bcba9","2d8a95d1-8554-4194-b427-4239c3f9ad5b","2fe1bef6-e797-4d9f-bb5b-6f936d7a55dc","2fede3c0-46a7-46e8-a776-5a6fd6d3f08e","301bb818-ff44-4346-9ffe-ad58bf13cfb2","31cae76c-aa62-4328-bd40-368275f60e9f","31f1f824-c698-4b97-a52a-1a1136a9ac6e","336a89c4-d98a-4242-8803-4d479689bc4d","34dc1c1f-d12c-4230-bb1c-e41b6961f288","3624ed70-d464-4caa-9b4e-4dfc2ed435dc","3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","38d24327-d93d-472b-99ac-246351c7dbfd","3c0e9d23-f858-47eb-8e7a-23db1d42822a","3e325b99-7611-4f89-8963-7f79c5ac4105","4216dab3-b436-422a-a6ee-74b5858f7aa2","438c4f31-19bd-4ff3-bed4-035569ec6cbf","43de8661-2844-46b7-bb39-15eb17f6b82e","451d9824-7933-403d-beaa-1ac6398509c9","45fdd40d-5bc4-4fe7-9eb9-883c55f14a70","46441742-607f-484f-80fe-b1334048144a","4726ed7e-d61a-4a2c-9e05-59cbaa4f1bf0","4a021f95-539e-4217-98a0-d651be9a3b47","4a638904-2bcf-4037-8afd-ec6e5b0b6b11","4d7063c6-5201-4ce1-89ed-75ee21d51b98","4f3026f8-7217-4bf9-af6e-71bcad8bb1c5","4fa075c9-a30f-47e5-8f09-158017bfd6d6","502ff9a1-ac00-4ef2-96cb-0a0614085766","504dd102-6089-4fcb-a066-0006720862a7","526515f5-4a82-4b0b-9e1c-7f3a2aa4cde4","550bda80-b5be-488a-89f6-64b9698b4033","57b2326c-e877-4995-82fc-221eda139718","5804b97c-c416-49d1-9fbd-5bb52c0595dd","58163259-bc87-4025-a6cc-f3a0848b52cf","58c8e8bf-9cbd-46dd-8a8b-b1b5cbb0d58d","5a7bde0b-59e0-4f86-9b63-2bbebb593d41","61a00782-20f7-4170-b4e2-d9d9157b3a3c","620bfde0-ec72-4b52-bfa4-e06ce3b56960","634a0a0f-0899-427f-9396-6cc3c5442643","672ecfdb-cb9d-485d-8fc1-76e6a8269fe7","67c4a0dd-5f32-4dde-b733-4a4a9e5dfafb","696bb9a6-aa69-4de4-a566-5df21482bc51","6f00035b-1437-428d-895c-a234866e29e0","6f4adcf4-c63b-41c9-b7f6-0b0f4e75c857","79cfeedd-0cef-4026-962d-c86d241c4e56","79f059b8-00b2-4345-ad46-440c7bc371df","7a539249-77a2-4e2b-a29f-6952304d80d7","7ddc7283-670a-4dfb-9e38-a11aa0c579c2","816a43e1-6b33-4a27-a385-9d12dd8e924f","8187d86e-f46c-4e26-8188-a4e7b31de2f6","84a895b3-81ad-42e9-b54d-614c66aca856","85680853-3899-4f21-b262-dbe3e8893779","86b559ac-3645-468b-9f43-7d961bd255d7","892c7a97-bb6b-47a5-9402-8a5293acf25b","89e1831f-7c8d-46ad-b545-7b0e141b1fa7","8aaa4093-987c-4a1d-8fbd-8e1d1e495fe3","91aa9ca8-e7d7-4036-a22f-5c8c8e7fc2ce","920f5e05-04f9-4545-b26d-ea48a1f18a2f","92b301e8-97fb-47a7-94a6-b858beb0a1fb","9368fe71-a18d-4580-8063-8e3f17e6cec9","9379cea2-647c-459b-af54-770e31e9bbe1","944709d1-19c5-461e-a509-d35f5314cc8e","948eda84-20a8-442d-8a0a-ffba051904a4","94d114b9-3c47-468e-8714-ed449f90e8e4","94faca18-b471-4748-8bab-f399641cedbd","95044e07-ad37-43f6-95b0-cebe1e9f8ce0","96621df7-0c9b-41e5-a5a6-3f21a24613d5","97c9d44f-1ca4-489d-a786-dc23f1fe1175","980db746-8492-4784-ab7e-f6c3b10378e1","9849e210-d94b-448b-885e-7bdffe11cfe9","9bd6a50e-945d-42d4-88de-97e83b4c3b06","9c74f902-2ef0-4269-b436-acc19aa11ea5","9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","9fe3b91d-3719-4260-926a-d5711bd1efc4","a06cd968-9dc5-42c5-a6e8-3d3c36dfc8c2","a18ba308-f8ab-4590-b466-daf80aa2b59c","a3aeeb23-ea47-454e-9079-05e2142e157d","a6385d09-ca9d-4f95-b5ba-4f50630bec35","a7002128-c4bc-48cd-bed1-46a529e69132","aa57f0d8-8cb4-4c4c-8ef4-4c4acdef25e4","b3b632d3-bab8-43e4-9749-51b79e59f7dd","b3e58970-8bf0-4e37-a8f9-dd4fce60bf46","b4a8aa1a-7262-4318-9579-9fff20f959a6","b556af30-b2db-4273-8b3b-a5b1ec113ebb","b55fc156-b5e6-49b6-b4f1-e092d3b4f553","b5940660-7f58-4123-bb25-6f78d4e1694d","b8eebc63-ef4e-4144-9327-420f594806c6","bf5cf44c-c3df-4c9c-b13b-8a0108b8a106","c349f006-e1f4-498e-970a-626a724e2231","c3aa82e4-0707-4514-a535-22d6d4a7f0b2","c6b3635d-7479-4594-9803-195c9d36f4a1","c6dcef79-69bf-47eb-a0b5-7b4d6bef00fc","c6e1c64f-1094-4a24-9d3e-8103fb4d94ab","cfd3be60-c380-4a63-8e12-5fd8af9b72bd","d18985ea-8239-498e-9147-eda1d0bb8bde","d301dc8a-7194-46ad-bf04-43efdc78c053","d315d00d-a3eb-4c0f-9554-c1395585910f","d7c49d74-0c9c-470b-94ad-c7ccaa111eaf","d96f8ae8-4753-4f7b-9ec5-3238eca05841","d9794536-257f-4a12-8d46-a7c0c649fb97","dab486f0-dfe1-46a8-b0d8-32e2a200b8e8","e1bbca7c-14db-40cf-a128-0219f12466a3","e27aa94c-fa47-4a58-bc17-1e5d3387b739","e4aba04c-81ff-438c-a506-881ff2436c82","e500f58c-3afd-4143-b4d2-f60500bf9023","e6d36e44-00e2-4f9e-95b1-e892e44117eb","e6f33250-4650-42ce-96e8-87ce7eebc853","ea51c75b-4b85-48fb-bbb7-8fde23c110aa","ea6c8861-7a39-4e19-8e71-58720131fa8d","eb84cbb3-24d1-4565-9ec1-8bd3b9d4bec9","ec990258-7999-4c93-81af-59b6ab2c65df","ed2c35d4-102a-4b73-8382-2ac35610faed","eec20343-5ffa-486c-b431-59ca5e4568d4","efb7c5ac-4ac5-4964-80cb-f95ebaa0e04c","f1307eae-cbfb-4f04-b6cc-3facd9e296d6","f40851bc-e6e8-4605-ba83-f44d932b4760","f4c53608-9890-4b9f-89a3-7c1028bc1e05","f5653eaf-7d13-4c91-93c7-e30daca2ec3a","f62defd3-7975-4edf-8f34-40a36b487ac8","f6e3366d-13bc-4a60-94b6-f77a2c2032c0","f9720bd0-18fb-4774-96e6-eca25490f73e","faaca14c-514a-4f25-897a-cd9bbc31d5d0","fdc662ec-5ed7-4d04-8993-6144ff01abc2","fec4e8d2-6a2f-4046-b9d4-85a831f76655","fee252e0-d871-44c1-8917-1fd2d148377a","ff4c3069-118e-4f08-aa39-6394130a8ec4","oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-055a850c7fce9512","oil-05aa031a4b58524e","oil-081117bbf714a215","oil-0d7b13a282f9b466","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","oil-1852e8a212bd5903","oil-1c3f4e35a1252449","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-23d97461886d2622","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-438415c185832786","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-4bd4c6831e9c7077","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-5413f17944743156","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-63426d939d718e7f","oil-63f43befc46e25fa","oil-66b89ef48f4536a9","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-7ced813eb9eb1314","oil-7ed3f9582cae741d","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-86a403aef71f924e","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-94951aba738c80b3","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-9f582ea75e0eddfb","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-a882a3e8b7aeb487","oil-a9685f88d15906f6","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-b434a85e1e9196d0","oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","oil-c1a2f95596a3b00d","oil-c2fa50179af284f7","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-c4d815318f8299b0","oil-c72d68cafd2478be","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-ce4031737a7654b3","oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","oil-d479413f1e610f85","oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f1693a0670f7b784","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-fba2e5ff157abb74","oil-fc5474312cf8529f","oil-fc714f38909e4348","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","oil-fcda56b4bb45ffd3"],"entries":[{"id":"regulatory_actions:entry:product-control-measures:seizure-or-confiscation","name":"Seizure or confiscation","definition":"A product-control action taking reported goods into official custody.","occurrences":238,"article_count":224,"event_count":237,"article_ids":["0109eea0-3adc-4177-a6f7-e3bc31bf237d","0a23e582-3dac-4091-bf36-a08d511a3763","0aa842b8-1ac9-4243-a8b6-5d98d32d6089","0e518ac8-dc53-4c79-938a-bd26c1142eeb","0ea7c6a7-d2c1-498f-aa00-f3fc942206ed","0f7493be-b335-4851-9029-9e87ba0da155","0facca96-d90c-4f21-ba98-356f7f6b1622","15f9d255-f348-4fb7-ba3d-003ab6adcfb2","164f43df-a069-4197-9854-e7bd9fc78fae","1931e9b4-edf1-42ec-a9c4-00ff0cbcff9a","1a066d87-0093-4ca8-9c10-84c004b76c48","1ae756d4-675e-4a08-bc7d-ba6a3e922d5d","1b74e29d-f583-4ee4-96bc-e93553c915b3","1c8fe57c-2cee-4f73-a5f3-6ee4051024e7","1de4a13b-1497-421e-b5bc-a8ebbc7a3b18","229a7f40-f956-476e-8c84-3fd9ed3d6c29","268e5866-7aea-4546-934f-f105a70b1096","26b11917-4e55-41d5-aeb1-64e8b44bedba","2719a94d-d523-4fef-bfd9-a1bef16dd951","28a03096-e60c-4adb-b4fa-55f0bd28a95d","292b562c-132b-47cc-9030-d2544e801e7e","2ad1f047-985c-4c59-aa13-749fa75bcba9","2d8a95d1-8554-4194-b427-4239c3f9ad5b","2fe1bef6-e797-4d9f-bb5b-6f936d7a55dc","2fede3c0-46a7-46e8-a776-5a6fd6d3f08e","301bb818-ff44-4346-9ffe-ad58bf13cfb2","31cae76c-aa62-4328-bd40-368275f60e9f","31f1f824-c698-4b97-a52a-1a1136a9ac6e","336a89c4-d98a-4242-8803-4d479689bc4d","34dc1c1f-d12c-4230-bb1c-e41b6961f288","3624ed70-d464-4caa-9b4e-4dfc2ed435dc","3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","38d24327-d93d-472b-99ac-246351c7dbfd","3c0e9d23-f858-47eb-8e7a-23db1d42822a","3e325b99-7611-4f89-8963-7f79c5ac4105","4216dab3-b436-422a-a6ee-74b5858f7aa2","438c4f31-19bd-4ff3-bed4-035569ec6cbf","43de8661-2844-46b7-bb39-15eb17f6b82e","451d9824-7933-403d-beaa-1ac6398509c9","45fdd40d-5bc4-4fe7-9eb9-883c55f14a70","46441742-607f-484f-80fe-b1334048144a","4726ed7e-d61a-4a2c-9e05-59cbaa4f1bf0","4a021f95-539e-4217-98a0-d651be9a3b47","4a638904-2bcf-4037-8afd-ec6e5b0b6b11","4d7063c6-5201-4ce1-89ed-75ee21d51b98","4f3026f8-7217-4bf9-af6e-71bcad8bb1c5","4fa075c9-a30f-47e5-8f09-158017bfd6d6","502ff9a1-ac00-4ef2-96cb-0a0614085766","504dd102-6089-4fcb-a066-0006720862a7","526515f5-4a82-4b0b-9e1c-7f3a2aa4cde4","550bda80-b5be-488a-89f6-64b9698b4033","57b2326c-e877-4995-82fc-221eda139718","5804b97c-c416-49d1-9fbd-5bb52c0595dd","58163259-bc87-4025-a6cc-f3a0848b52cf","58c8e8bf-9cbd-46dd-8a8b-b1b5cbb0d58d","5a7bde0b-59e0-4f86-9b63-2bbebb593d41","61a00782-20f7-4170-b4e2-d9d9157b3a3c","620bfde0-ec72-4b52-bfa4-e06ce3b56960","634a0a0f-0899-427f-9396-6cc3c5442643","672ecfdb-cb9d-485d-8fc1-76e6a8269fe7","67c4a0dd-5f32-4dde-b733-4a4a9e5dfafb","696bb9a6-aa69-4de4-a566-5df21482bc51","6f00035b-1437-428d-895c-a234866e29e0","6f4adcf4-c63b-41c9-b7f6-0b0f4e75c857","79cfeedd-0cef-4026-962d-c86d241c4e56","79f059b8-00b2-4345-ad46-440c7bc371df","7a539249-77a2-4e2b-a29f-6952304d80d7","7ddc7283-670a-4dfb-9e38-a11aa0c579c2","816a43e1-6b33-4a27-a385-9d12dd8e924f","8187d86e-f46c-4e26-8188-a4e7b31de2f6","84a895b3-81ad-42e9-b54d-614c66aca856","85680853-3899-4f21-b262-dbe3e8893779","86b559ac-3645-468b-9f43-7d961bd255d7","892c7a97-bb6b-47a5-9402-8a5293acf25b","89e1831f-7c8d-46ad-b545-7b0e141b1fa7","8aaa4093-987c-4a1d-8fbd-8e1d1e495fe3","91aa9ca8-e7d7-4036-a22f-5c8c8e7fc2ce","920f5e05-04f9-4545-b26d-ea48a1f18a2f","92b301e8-97fb-47a7-94a6-b858beb0a1fb","9368fe71-a18d-4580-8063-8e3f17e6cec9","9379cea2-647c-459b-af54-770e31e9bbe1","944709d1-19c5-461e-a509-d35f5314cc8e","948eda84-20a8-442d-8a0a-ffba051904a4","94d114b9-3c47-468e-8714-ed449f90e8e4","94faca18-b471-4748-8bab-f399641cedbd","95044e07-ad37-43f6-95b0-cebe1e9f8ce0","96621df7-0c9b-41e5-a5a6-3f21a24613d5","97c9d44f-1ca4-489d-a786-dc23f1fe1175","980db746-8492-4784-ab7e-f6c3b10378e1","9849e210-d94b-448b-885e-7bdffe11cfe9","9bd6a50e-945d-42d4-88de-97e83b4c3b06","9c74f902-2ef0-4269-b436-acc19aa11ea5","9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","9fe3b91d-3719-4260-926a-d5711bd1efc4","a06cd968-9dc5-42c5-a6e8-3d3c36dfc8c2","a18ba308-f8ab-4590-b466-daf80aa2b59c","a3aeeb23-ea47-454e-9079-05e2142e157d","a6385d09-ca9d-4f95-b5ba-4f50630bec35","a7002128-c4bc-48cd-bed1-46a529e69132","aa57f0d8-8cb4-4c4c-8ef4-4c4acdef25e4","b3b632d3-bab8-43e4-9749-51b79e59f7dd","b3e58970-8bf0-4e37-a8f9-dd4fce60bf46","b4a8aa1a-7262-4318-9579-9fff20f959a6","b556af30-b2db-4273-8b3b-a5b1ec113ebb","b55fc156-b5e6-49b6-b4f1-e092d3b4f553","b5940660-7f58-4123-bb25-6f78d4e1694d","b8eebc63-ef4e-4144-9327-420f594806c6","bf5cf44c-c3df-4c9c-b13b-8a0108b8a106","c349f006-e1f4-498e-970a-626a724e2231","c3aa82e4-0707-4514-a535-22d6d4a7f0b2","c6b3635d-7479-4594-9803-195c9d36f4a1","c6dcef79-69bf-47eb-a0b5-7b4d6bef00fc","c6e1c64f-1094-4a24-9d3e-8103fb4d94ab","cfd3be60-c380-4a63-8e12-5fd8af9b72bd","d18985ea-8239-498e-9147-eda1d0bb8bde","d301dc8a-7194-46ad-bf04-43efdc78c053","d315d00d-a3eb-4c0f-9554-c1395585910f","d7c49d74-0c9c-470b-94ad-c7ccaa111eaf","d96f8ae8-4753-4f7b-9ec5-3238eca05841","d9794536-257f-4a12-8d46-a7c0c649fb97","dab486f0-dfe1-46a8-b0d8-32e2a200b8e8","e1bbca7c-14db-40cf-a128-0219f12466a3","e27aa94c-fa47-4a58-bc17-1e5d3387b739","e4aba04c-81ff-438c-a506-881ff2436c82","e500f58c-3afd-4143-b4d2-f60500bf9023","e6d36e44-00e2-4f9e-95b1-e892e44117eb","e6f33250-4650-42ce-96e8-87ce7eebc853","ea51c75b-4b85-48fb-bbb7-8fde23c110aa","ea6c8861-7a39-4e19-8e71-58720131fa8d","eb84cbb3-24d1-4565-9ec1-8bd3b9d4bec9","ec990258-7999-4c93-81af-59b6ab2c65df","ed2c35d4-102a-4b73-8382-2ac35610faed","eec20343-5ffa-486c-b431-59ca5e4568d4","efb7c5ac-4ac5-4964-80cb-f95ebaa0e04c","f1307eae-cbfb-4f04-b6cc-3facd9e296d6","f40851bc-e6e8-4605-ba83-f44d932b4760","f4c53608-9890-4b9f-89a3-7c1028bc1e05","f5653eaf-7d13-4c91-93c7-e30daca2ec3a","f62defd3-7975-4edf-8f34-40a36b487ac8","f6e3366d-13bc-4a60-94b6-f77a2c2032c0","f9720bd0-18fb-4774-96e6-eca25490f73e","faaca14c-514a-4f25-897a-cd9bbc31d5d0","fdc662ec-5ed7-4d04-8993-6144ff01abc2","fec4e8d2-6a2f-4046-b9d4-85a831f76655","fee252e0-d871-44c1-8917-1fd2d148377a","ff4c3069-118e-4f08-aa39-6394130a8ec4","oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-055a850c7fce9512","oil-05aa031a4b58524e","oil-081117bbf714a215","oil-0d7b13a282f9b466","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","oil-1852e8a212bd5903","oil-1c3f4e35a1252449","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-23d97461886d2622","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-438415c185832786","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-4bd4c6831e9c7077","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-5413f17944743156","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-63426d939d718e7f","oil-63f43befc46e25fa","oil-66b89ef48f4536a9","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-7ced813eb9eb1314","oil-7ed3f9582cae741d","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-86a403aef71f924e","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-94951aba738c80b3","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-9f582ea75e0eddfb","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-a9685f88d15906f6","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-b434a85e1e9196d0","oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","oil-c1a2f95596a3b00d","oil-c2fa50179af284f7","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-c4d815318f8299b0","oil-c72d68cafd2478be","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-ce4031737a7654b3","oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","oil-d479413f1e610f85","oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f1693a0670f7b784","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-fba2e5ff157abb74","oil-fc714f38909e4348","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","oil-fcda56b4bb45ffd3"],"ontology_types":["fbo:RegulatoryAction","fflo:EnforcementAction","fflo:RegulatoryAction","fflo:Seizure","fkg:Action","fkg:RegulatoryAction","fkg:Seizure","fso:RegulatoryAction","fso:Seizure","seizure"],"aliases":["confiscation","search_and_seizure","seized","seizure","Seizure of 15 litres of cooking oil","Seizure of 34 litre refined soyabean oil","seizure of 42 kg of suspected adulterated ghee","Seizure of 6.6 lakh kgs adulterated food","Seizure of 799 litre mustard oil","Seizure of adulterated food and oil","seizure of adulterated oil","seizure of documents and equipment","seizure of goods","seizure of samples for laboratory examination"]},{"id":"regulatory_actions:entry:product-control-measures:ban-or-prohibition","name":"Ban or prohibition","definition":"A regulatory action prohibiting a product, brand, activity, or sale.","occurrences":6,"article_count":5,"event_count":6,"article_ids":["526515f5-4a82-4b0b-9e1c-7f3a2aa4cde4","67c4a0dd-5f32-4dde-b733-4a4a9e5dfafb","980db746-8492-4784-ab7e-f6c3b10378e1","oil-a882a3e8b7aeb487","oil-fc5474312cf8529f"],"ontology_types":["fflo:RegulatoryAction","fkg:RegulatoryAction"],"aliases":["ban","ban on 166 coconut oil brands","bank account freeze","banning of 42 brands of coconut oil"]}]},{"id":"regulatory_actions:group:legal-and-corrective-measures","name":"Legal and corrective measures","definition":"Arrest, case registration, prosecution, fines, notices, warnings, and advisories.","occurrences":214,"article_count":190,"event_count":194,"article_ids":["0a23e582-3dac-4091-bf36-a08d511a3763","0aa842b8-1ac9-4243-a8b6-5d98d32d6089","0d14295d-a954-4163-8974-ecb51bd464e8","0e518ac8-dc53-4c79-938a-bd26c1142eeb","0ef4d3e4-844c-47ee-a430-8f171ec4c000","0facca96-d90c-4f21-ba98-356f7f6b1622","10f36230-190b-4b13-8cfc-8d12c2f37080","15f9d255-f348-4fb7-ba3d-003ab6adcfb2","1c7ea343-020a-4266-9854-b12ebfa2cf50","1c8fe57c-2cee-4f73-a5f3-6ee4051024e7","1df33743-1016-49ce-981b-862125c0893f","21fb2b00-9b86-4924-9a0d-248f976cfd93","22261df7-8974-447f-a1cf-192c59528f64","229a7f40-f956-476e-8c84-3fd9ed3d6c29","22bf4101-c33b-4711-b6e3-379968f7c217","2499d49c-748f-41d8-84d9-eed7a66ad43a","255ac21d-c17e-4926-9dad-13db7698ed72","2719a94d-d523-4fef-bfd9-a1bef16dd951","28a03096-e60c-4adb-b4fa-55f0bd28a95d","2ad1f047-985c-4c59-aa13-749fa75bcba9","2b442757-da6a-46e5-ae37-b083e00062d3","2f23ec7d-e712-46f5-ae1c-5e7634725242","2fe1bef6-e797-4d9f-bb5b-6f936d7a55dc","2fede3c0-46a7-46e8-a776-5a6fd6d3f08e","301bb818-ff44-4346-9ffe-ad58bf13cfb2","31cae76c-aa62-4328-bd40-368275f60e9f","31f1f824-c698-4b97-a52a-1a1136a9ac6e","3278338f-1fa0-4045-9701-e237d5ad0930","3282adec-c328-4317-a091-a126587d78de","36a70fc6-de5a-494c-9dc5-801fe7a7a53d","3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","3c0e9d23-f858-47eb-8e7a-23db1d42822a","3cdd0ffb-841b-4883-9b1a-df7b28022554","3e325b99-7611-4f89-8963-7f79c5ac4105","3f674523-5416-4b89-8cab-fe3ddf3c9e7e","4216dab3-b436-422a-a6ee-74b5858f7aa2","4299b01d-c5ab-4283-ae2d-31aa1fdbbfec","43de8661-2844-46b7-bb39-15eb17f6b82e","4469e268-1b01-49b7-a436-ea4a88ba6269","471bc3da-bbd4-417c-875a-595a713be7fd","4726ed7e-d61a-4a2c-9e05-59cbaa4f1bf0","473ed916-1979-4222-b1e8-38d39c51fe03","47635cd8-696c-4adf-94ed-338f084a3d62","4a021f95-539e-4217-98a0-d651be9a3b47","4a638904-2bcf-4037-8afd-ec6e5b0b6b11","4d6ab7d0-4e16-4d1b-aa49-7f453c9352b6","4d7063c6-5201-4ce1-89ed-75ee21d51b98","4eb18b90-e310-48db-9531-68b146420749","4f3026f8-7217-4bf9-af6e-71bcad8bb1c5","4fa075c9-a30f-47e5-8f09-158017bfd6d6","502ff9a1-ac00-4ef2-96cb-0a0614085766","504dd102-6089-4fcb-a066-0006720862a7","526515f5-4a82-4b0b-9e1c-7f3a2aa4cde4","5374dadc-cd7f-41df-b8d9-8ef7c10ec693","54686005-b842-4cc5-82b1-0276e36a42b6","5710a503-9fbe-46ae-abd5-2663069b70db","590fff58-7ba9-4a5b-8232-4c27d67f13b1","5a7bde0b-59e0-4f86-9b63-2bbebb593d41","6135126e-45b3-4fe7-a80f-82248b08ea7b","620bfde0-ec72-4b52-bfa4-e06ce3b56960","634a0a0f-0899-427f-9396-6cc3c5442643","6411a3a1-2932-41eb-b497-f9a2400de74c","66bb816a-1961-4e45-8460-9328304c7956","6721b632-2b4f-492a-840d-bb05d2a9f1af","672ecfdb-cb9d-485d-8fc1-76e6a8269fe7","68753b50-8fe7-4499-bb2d-ddfcc7e16c94","6a44ea24-a3bf-4ad8-96b1-5ae56cefb84c","6cf864fb-5956-4416-a1c5-f42153e66ec4","6ee56cf3-78f2-4420-bede-08f76397b2fb","6f4adcf4-c63b-41c9-b7f6-0b0f4e75c857","71196507-ad87-406f-a4df-edc8a14b1575","73369c4a-c44b-4b7a-b3cc-07766ccb4e2a","747400a0-bfad-4fa2-8004-06f237d1c543","75f7eb04-35fe-48ce-af4a-d0ccf3067076","79f059b8-00b2-4345-ad46-440c7bc371df","7a707681-5edc-461c-b5a8-0057a374f3cc","7c914cb3-8ba1-4768-ac56-a051b75a6e8b","7ddc7283-670a-4dfb-9e38-a11aa0c579c2","8151434e-f600-47a9-93df-16b483e88961","815dcb75-691c-4066-a898-b7ed46fdbdf2","8187d86e-f46c-4e26-8188-a4e7b31de2f6","835cbabf-d424-4f04-89cb-1d8c0b08f1ab","84ea460e-bfc2-4977-aebb-32594a90693b","86b559ac-3645-468b-9f43-7d961bd255d7","897c7de9-ed19-4ee2-a2d5-85b75355519d","89e1831f-7c8d-46ad-b545-7b0e141b1fa7","8aaa4093-987c-4a1d-8fbd-8e1d1e495fe3","93c87fee-61ec-4ea8-bd4f-3434669835ee","946d9238-09b9-474e-8481-5e734cedca7a","948eda84-20a8-442d-8a0a-ffba051904a4","94d114b9-3c47-468e-8714-ed449f90e8e4","97c9d44f-1ca4-489d-a786-dc23f1fe1175","9849e210-d94b-448b-885e-7bdffe11cfe9","9c74f902-2ef0-4269-b436-acc19aa11ea5","9c81b00b-87e1-4cce-bfc8-9583b3b8a234","9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","9d92713b-a9c4-4b7e-87f4-c4fd443e38b5","a06cd968-9dc5-42c5-a6e8-3d3c36dfc8c2","a3aeeb23-ea47-454e-9079-05e2142e157d","a3ce7cd2-ee71-42ce-b4f7-96a81c6bd295","a45c3495-d077-4241-b1d7-72fa109d0e6b","a6385d09-ca9d-4f95-b5ba-4f50630bec35","a7002128-c4bc-48cd-bed1-46a529e69132","a96905fe-9d68-4a0c-9c4e-ce250411fcd9","ab7d0ab2-d774-415c-bd3f-a606f92ef3c3","abb94f1c-6bf3-442d-9749-eacc170b025c","ac5e071a-48a2-4a53-a1f6-5fc7b6d35280","adfa4015-b34e-4488-99e4-b20b4dc10324","aec84261-126b-4386-b0f4-15f160ca67ae","b5940660-7f58-4123-bb25-6f78d4e1694d","b6a4c3c9-311e-4a4f-beaf-d0012bbfbf51","bcd183c8-344e-4cb8-8561-8c2e6a027897","c2875090-e4c1-4cec-be8a-7218c8774f6b","c51ad2dc-5440-4692-bdac-73968c6ad4d2","c5597192-fe4a-479a-8bf7-cdcf15d74d10","c6b3635d-7479-4594-9803-195c9d36f4a1","c7803b74-2f5d-47d0-a09e-c27ed98ec1a3","cd235f2c-1119-4002-b756-61e2983b0232","cddf4a6a-4d4e-4d8b-9631-734b807f7215","cfd3be60-c380-4a63-8e12-5fd8af9b72bd","d18985ea-8239-498e-9147-eda1d0bb8bde","d301dc8a-7194-46ad-bf04-43efdc78c053","d315d00d-a3eb-4c0f-9554-c1395585910f","d7c49d74-0c9c-470b-94ad-c7ccaa111eaf","d9794536-257f-4a12-8d46-a7c0c649fb97","ddada193-97b9-4ccc-8a51-bfbea77a0c06","df6dd614-6785-4c3a-b6c7-1e091a751c64","e06bafea-36a4-40ac-8e47-2a2619fd46fd","e2f38cc3-06ff-4db2-8aad-a537c1e1d0c8","e6f33250-4650-42ce-96e8-87ce7eebc853","ea0bba2c-7a56-40f2-afac-00f638b54fc3","ea6c8861-7a39-4e19-8e71-58720131fa8d","eec20343-5ffa-486c-b431-59ca5e4568d4","ef391115-fde1-44aa-ab00-abb8e2e7ec82","f1307eae-cbfb-4f04-b6cc-3facd9e296d6","f1ba13f7-7414-47ce-9df3-a6aa0902c1b9","f24f8cd0-0ca1-49cf-8cf1-4a5e6b938fe3","f319102d-533a-41ff-9f08-6bda6778bb7e","f40851bc-e6e8-4605-ba83-f44d932b4760","f5653eaf-7d13-4c91-93c7-e30daca2ec3a","f62defd3-7975-4edf-8f34-40a36b487ac8","fe4e9bc0-2802-4dd8-97e4-27704fad2a1b","ff092982-3b6e-4f4c-8194-6b8201ee1246","oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-06d5928124689ba0","oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-156fd0980ec51fe6","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-1c3f4e35a1252449","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-42c4efcdce45e35d","oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-7269f661e72c703f","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-bd1df718191f8f6e","oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","oil-c0e8fd0149fa83c4","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-c94e003c369b3450","oil-ce4031737a7654b3","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-e1cd585e16b9635b","oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","oil-e72f16ac2686175c","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f1693a0670f7b784","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","oil-fcda56b4bb45ffd3","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5"],"entries":[{"id":"regulatory_actions:entry:legal-and-corrective-measures:arrest-or-custody","name":"Arrest or custody","definition":"A normalized regulatory actions concept combining 9 extracted labels.","occurrences":111,"article_count":102,"event_count":104,"article_ids":["0aa842b8-1ac9-4243-a8b6-5d98d32d6089","0d14295d-a954-4163-8974-ecb51bd464e8","0e518ac8-dc53-4c79-938a-bd26c1142eeb","0facca96-d90c-4f21-ba98-356f7f6b1622","15f9d255-f348-4fb7-ba3d-003ab6adcfb2","1c7ea343-020a-4266-9854-b12ebfa2cf50","21fb2b00-9b86-4924-9a0d-248f976cfd93","2499d49c-748f-41d8-84d9-eed7a66ad43a","255ac21d-c17e-4926-9dad-13db7698ed72","28a03096-e60c-4adb-b4fa-55f0bd28a95d","2ad1f047-985c-4c59-aa13-749fa75bcba9","2f23ec7d-e712-46f5-ae1c-5e7634725242","2fe1bef6-e797-4d9f-bb5b-6f936d7a55dc","2fede3c0-46a7-46e8-a776-5a6fd6d3f08e","31cae76c-aa62-4328-bd40-368275f60e9f","3278338f-1fa0-4045-9701-e237d5ad0930","3282adec-c328-4317-a091-a126587d78de","3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","3c0e9d23-f858-47eb-8e7a-23db1d42822a","3cdd0ffb-841b-4883-9b1a-df7b28022554","3e325b99-7611-4f89-8963-7f79c5ac4105","4216dab3-b436-422a-a6ee-74b5858f7aa2","4726ed7e-d61a-4a2c-9e05-59cbaa4f1bf0","47635cd8-696c-4adf-94ed-338f084a3d62","4a638904-2bcf-4037-8afd-ec6e5b0b6b11","4d6ab7d0-4e16-4d1b-aa49-7f453c9352b6","4d7063c6-5201-4ce1-89ed-75ee21d51b98","4fa075c9-a30f-47e5-8f09-158017bfd6d6","502ff9a1-ac00-4ef2-96cb-0a0614085766","504dd102-6089-4fcb-a066-0006720862a7","526515f5-4a82-4b0b-9e1c-7f3a2aa4cde4","54686005-b842-4cc5-82b1-0276e36a42b6","5710a503-9fbe-46ae-abd5-2663069b70db","5a7bde0b-59e0-4f86-9b63-2bbebb593d41","6135126e-45b3-4fe7-a80f-82248b08ea7b","620bfde0-ec72-4b52-bfa4-e06ce3b56960","6411a3a1-2932-41eb-b497-f9a2400de74c","672ecfdb-cb9d-485d-8fc1-76e6a8269fe7","68753b50-8fe7-4499-bb2d-ddfcc7e16c94","6a44ea24-a3bf-4ad8-96b1-5ae56cefb84c","6cf864fb-5956-4416-a1c5-f42153e66ec4","6f4adcf4-c63b-41c9-b7f6-0b0f4e75c857","71196507-ad87-406f-a4df-edc8a14b1575","73369c4a-c44b-4b7a-b3cc-07766ccb4e2a","7a707681-5edc-461c-b5a8-0057a374f3cc","815dcb75-691c-4066-a898-b7ed46fdbdf2","8187d86e-f46c-4e26-8188-a4e7b31de2f6","835cbabf-d424-4f04-89cb-1d8c0b08f1ab","84ea460e-bfc2-4977-aebb-32594a90693b","86b559ac-3645-468b-9f43-7d961bd255d7","897c7de9-ed19-4ee2-a2d5-85b75355519d","8aaa4093-987c-4a1d-8fbd-8e1d1e495fe3","948eda84-20a8-442d-8a0a-ffba051904a4","94d114b9-3c47-468e-8714-ed449f90e8e4","9849e210-d94b-448b-885e-7bdffe11cfe9","9c74f902-2ef0-4269-b436-acc19aa11ea5","9c81b00b-87e1-4cce-bfc8-9583b3b8a234","9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","9d92713b-a9c4-4b7e-87f4-c4fd443e38b5","a3aeeb23-ea47-454e-9079-05e2142e157d","a3ce7cd2-ee71-42ce-b4f7-96a81c6bd295","a45c3495-d077-4241-b1d7-72fa109d0e6b","a6385d09-ca9d-4f95-b5ba-4f50630bec35","ab7d0ab2-d774-415c-bd3f-a606f92ef3c3","abb94f1c-6bf3-442d-9749-eacc170b025c","ac5e071a-48a2-4a53-a1f6-5fc7b6d35280","adfa4015-b34e-4488-99e4-b20b4dc10324","aec84261-126b-4386-b0f4-15f160ca67ae","b5940660-7f58-4123-bb25-6f78d4e1694d","bcd183c8-344e-4cb8-8561-8c2e6a027897","c2875090-e4c1-4cec-be8a-7218c8774f6b","c51ad2dc-5440-4692-bdac-73968c6ad4d2","c5597192-fe4a-479a-8bf7-cdcf15d74d10","c6b3635d-7479-4594-9803-195c9d36f4a1","cddf4a6a-4d4e-4d8b-9631-734b807f7215","d18985ea-8239-498e-9147-eda1d0bb8bde","d301dc8a-7194-46ad-bf04-43efdc78c053","d315d00d-a3eb-4c0f-9554-c1395585910f","d7c49d74-0c9c-470b-94ad-c7ccaa111eaf","d9794536-257f-4a12-8d46-a7c0c649fb97","ddada193-97b9-4ccc-8a51-bfbea77a0c06","e06bafea-36a4-40ac-8e47-2a2619fd46fd","e2f38cc3-06ff-4db2-8aad-a537c1e1d0c8","ea0bba2c-7a56-40f2-afac-00f638b54fc3","ea6c8861-7a39-4e19-8e71-58720131fa8d","f1307eae-cbfb-4f04-b6cc-3facd9e296d6","f24f8cd0-0ca1-49cf-8cf1-4a5e6b938fe3","f40851bc-e6e8-4605-ba83-f44d932b4760","fe4e9bc0-2802-4dd8-97e4-27704fad2a1b","ff092982-3b6e-4f4c-8194-6b8201ee1246","oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-156fd0980ec51fe6","oil-1c3f4e35a1252449","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-f138f57de764f810"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Custody","fflo:EnforcementAction","fflo:RegulatoryAction","fkg:Action","fkg:RegulatoryAction","fso:EnforcementAction","fso:RegulatoryAction"],"aliases":["arrest","arrest of four persons","arrests","arrests_made","custody","custody_granted","detention","judicial custody","police custody"]},{"id":"regulatory_actions:entry:legal-and-corrective-measures:case-registration-or-fir","name":"Case registration or FIR","definition":"Registration or filing of a police or regulatory case, including an FIR.","occurrences":40,"article_count":40,"event_count":40,"article_ids":["0a23e582-3dac-4091-bf36-a08d511a3763","1c8fe57c-2cee-4f73-a5f3-6ee4051024e7","229a7f40-f956-476e-8c84-3fd9ed3d6c29","2719a94d-d523-4fef-bfd9-a1bef16dd951","28a03096-e60c-4adb-b4fa-55f0bd28a95d","36a70fc6-de5a-494c-9dc5-801fe7a7a53d","3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","43de8661-2844-46b7-bb39-15eb17f6b82e","473ed916-1979-4222-b1e8-38d39c51fe03","4a021f95-539e-4217-98a0-d651be9a3b47","5374dadc-cd7f-41df-b8d9-8ef7c10ec693","620bfde0-ec72-4b52-bfa4-e06ce3b56960","634a0a0f-0899-427f-9396-6cc3c5442643","7ddc7283-670a-4dfb-9e38-a11aa0c579c2","8151434e-f600-47a9-93df-16b483e88961","94d114b9-3c47-468e-8714-ed449f90e8e4","97c9d44f-1ca4-489d-a786-dc23f1fe1175","9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","a06cd968-9dc5-42c5-a6e8-3d3c36dfc8c2","b5940660-7f58-4123-bb25-6f78d4e1694d","b6a4c3c9-311e-4a4f-beaf-d0012bbfbf51","c7803b74-2f5d-47d0-a09e-c27ed98ec1a3","cfd3be60-c380-4a63-8e12-5fd8af9b72bd","eec20343-5ffa-486c-b431-59ca5e4568d4","f1ba13f7-7414-47ce-9df3-a6aa0902c1b9","f5653eaf-7d13-4c91-93c7-e30daca2ec3a","f62defd3-7975-4edf-8f34-40a36b487ac8","oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-7269f661e72c703f","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","oil-ce4031737a7654b3","oil-f1693a0670f7b784","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","oil-fcda56b4bb45ffd3"],"ontology_types":["fflo:EnforcementAction","fflo:RegulatoryAction","fkg:LegalAction","fkg:RegulatoryAction","fso:RegulatoryAction"],"aliases":["booking","booking of persons","booking of three persons","booking under IPC","case booked","case registration","case_booked","case_filed","FIR","FIR filed","FIR Filing","FIR lodged","FIR registered","FIR registration","First Information Report","registration of criminal cases","Tests conducted by the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) confirmed the presence of animal fat in the ghee supplied during the YSRCP tenure","TTD rejected four tankers of ghee after laboratory tests confirmed adulteration"]},{"id":"regulatory_actions:entry:legal-and-corrective-measures:notice-warning-or-advisory","name":"Notice, warning, or advisory","definition":"A normalized regulatory actions concept combining 22 extracted labels.","occurrences":37,"article_count":35,"event_count":37,"article_ids":["10f36230-190b-4b13-8cfc-8d12c2f37080","22261df7-8974-447f-a1cf-192c59528f64","22bf4101-c33b-4711-b6e3-379968f7c217","2719a94d-d523-4fef-bfd9-a1bef16dd951","301bb818-ff44-4346-9ffe-ad58bf13cfb2","4299b01d-c5ab-4283-ae2d-31aa1fdbbfec","4469e268-1b01-49b7-a436-ea4a88ba6269","471bc3da-bbd4-417c-875a-595a713be7fd","4eb18b90-e310-48db-9531-68b146420749","590fff58-7ba9-4a5b-8232-4c27d67f13b1","66bb816a-1961-4e45-8460-9328304c7956","6721b632-2b4f-492a-840d-bb05d2a9f1af","6ee56cf3-78f2-4420-bede-08f76397b2fb","75f7eb04-35fe-48ce-af4a-d0ccf3067076","7c914cb3-8ba1-4768-ac56-a051b75a6e8b","946d9238-09b9-474e-8481-5e734cedca7a","a7002128-c4bc-48cd-bed1-46a529e69132","cd235f2c-1119-4002-b756-61e2983b0232","df6dd614-6785-4c3a-b6c7-1e091a751c64","e6f33250-4650-42ce-96e8-87ce7eebc853","ef391115-fde1-44aa-ab00-abb8e2e7ec82","f319102d-533a-41ff-9f08-6bda6778bb7e","oil-06d5928124689ba0","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-42c4efcdce45e35d","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-e1cd585e16b9635b","oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","oil-e72f16ac2686175c","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5"],"ontology_types":["fflo:RegulatoryAction","fkg:RegulatoryAction","regulatory_action"],"aliases":["advisory","correction notices","formal improvement notice","immediate rectification notice","improvement notice","improvement_notice","notice","notice issued","Notice to 55 edible oil manufacturers","notice to Omfed","notice_issued","notices","notices issued","public announcement","public notice","show cause notice","show-cause notice","show-cause notices","show-cause notices to AR Dairy Foods","show_cause_notice","warning","warning to suppliers"]},{"id":"regulatory_actions:entry:legal-and-corrective-measures:prosecution-or-legal-action","name":"Prosecution or legal action","definition":"A normalized regulatory actions concept combining 7 extracted labels.","occurrences":14,"article_count":14,"event_count":14,"article_ids":["0ef4d3e4-844c-47ee-a430-8f171ec4c000","31f1f824-c698-4b97-a52a-1a1136a9ac6e","3f674523-5416-4b89-8cab-fe3ddf3c9e7e","4f3026f8-7217-4bf9-af6e-71bcad8bb1c5","747400a0-bfad-4fa2-8004-06f237d1c543","79f059b8-00b2-4345-ad46-440c7bc371df","84ea460e-bfc2-4977-aebb-32594a90693b","89e1831f-7c8d-46ad-b545-7b0e141b1fa7","93c87fee-61ec-4ea8-bd4f-3434669835ee","oil-42c4efcdce45e35d","oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-c84820229ce8af05"],"ontology_types":["fbo:RegulatoryAction","fflo:RegulatoryAction","fkg:RegulatoryAction","fso:RegulatoryAction"],"aliases":["criminal proceedings","criminal proceedings likely","legal action","Legal action under Food Safety and Standards Act","legal and penal action","legal proceedings","legal_proceedings"]},{"id":"regulatory_actions:entry:legal-and-corrective-measures:financial-penalty","name":"Financial penalty","definition":"A fine or monetary penalty imposed or reported.","occurrences":10,"article_count":9,"event_count":9,"article_ids":["1df33743-1016-49ce-981b-862125c0893f","2b442757-da6a-46e5-ae37-b083e00062d3","a96905fe-9d68-4a0c-9c4e-ce250411fcd9","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-bd1df718191f8f6e","oil-c0e8fd0149fa83c4","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40"],"ontology_types":["fflo:RegulatoryAction","fkg:RegulatoryAction"],"aliases":["fine","fine of Rs 20,000 each under Section 51 of the FSSA","fine of Rs 5,000 each under Section 59 (i) of the Act","Fine of ₹50","Fine of ₹7 lakh","fines","penalty","Rs 2 lakh fine","Rs 2.25 lakh fine"]},{"id":"regulatory_actions:entry:legal-and-corrective-measures:other-corrective-action","name":"Other corrective action","definition":"A normalized regulatory actions concept combining 2 extracted labels.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-c94e003c369b3450"],"ontology_types":["fflo:RegulatoryAction"],"aliases":["Action is being initiated against the outlet","necessary action"]}]},{"id":"regulatory_actions:group:inspection-and-evidence-collection","name":"Inspection and evidence collection","definition":"Raids, inspections, sampling, testing orders, and survey activity.","occurrences":105,"article_count":95,"event_count":98,"article_ids":["0ea7c6a7-d2c1-498f-aa00-f3fc942206ed","15f9d255-f348-4fb7-ba3d-003ab6adcfb2","1c8fe57c-2cee-4f73-a5f3-6ee4051024e7","229a7f40-f956-476e-8c84-3fd9ed3d6c29","23a5dd2a-a53c-44b8-8b86-37e04d4cf1ee","2c075e82-3fe3-4b95-a68a-f0fad41e51f5","2d8a95d1-8554-4194-b427-4239c3f9ad5b","2fede3c0-46a7-46e8-a776-5a6fd6d3f08e","31cae76c-aa62-4328-bd40-368275f60e9f","3278338f-1fa0-4045-9701-e237d5ad0930","34dc1c1f-d12c-4230-bb1c-e41b6961f288","368930a7-2085-43bd-bb79-62d471c9e75c","36a70fc6-de5a-494c-9dc5-801fe7a7a53d","3c0e9d23-f858-47eb-8e7a-23db1d42822a","3e325b99-7611-4f89-8963-7f79c5ac4105","411b1d1a-7b18-4425-90f0-da2c296625eb","4216dab3-b436-422a-a6ee-74b5858f7aa2","4726ed7e-d61a-4a2c-9e05-59cbaa4f1bf0","473ed916-1979-4222-b1e8-38d39c51fe03","4f3026f8-7217-4bf9-af6e-71bcad8bb1c5","4fa075c9-a30f-47e5-8f09-158017bfd6d6","504dd102-6089-4fcb-a066-0006720862a7","508d009a-650f-4e40-b03d-ebef9d2c069e","5118358f-2777-4bfd-a761-adb4bc1da763","51a534c1-9193-4b8c-bbd2-b4e368930ead","526515f5-4a82-4b0b-9e1c-7f3a2aa4cde4","52bd3a8a-1c92-484d-8be6-5f7e4a7274e1","57b2326c-e877-4995-82fc-221eda139718","68753b50-8fe7-4499-bb2d-ddfcc7e16c94","6f4adcf4-c63b-41c9-b7f6-0b0f4e75c857","706f0136-7ae5-45f2-b804-e3a8c9a14d1c","7ddc7283-670a-4dfb-9e38-a11aa0c579c2","84a895b3-81ad-42e9-b54d-614c66aca856","86b559ac-3645-468b-9f43-7d961bd255d7","91aa9ca8-e7d7-4036-a22f-5c8c8e7fc2ce","9379cea2-647c-459b-af54-770e31e9bbe1","96621df7-0c9b-41e5-a5a6-3f21a24613d5","9c81b00b-87e1-4cce-bfc8-9583b3b8a234","9cbf8104-4fa2-4365-bc32-09eb2d1c9381","9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","a18ba308-f8ab-4590-b466-daf80aa2b59c","add15855-56e0-4264-819c-b8e8110846aa","b3e58970-8bf0-4e37-a8f9-dd4fce60bf46","b5940660-7f58-4123-bb25-6f78d4e1694d","bf5cf44c-c3df-4c9c-b13b-8a0108b8a106","c2853c18-cc20-43b6-bd36-3b77725ba1d7","c66f7c07-f922-4abd-8805-71a0fade560f","c6b3635d-7479-4594-9803-195c9d36f4a1","c8ddee14-df38-49aa-9d85-a7c6b34273a6","c999d71f-777d-4d80-9f37-37391f97acd4","ce0c52be-896a-479c-b92b-09bf3518d332","d2f303e3-c25c-412f-8ae4-4ec525f68736","d301dc8a-7194-46ad-bf04-43efdc78c053","d315d00d-a3eb-4c0f-9554-c1395585910f","db8eb9e3-f6e6-4be4-b6d2-d135a6c3e9ac","e1083f09-5ed1-4bdf-8ac5-3c65482b8e5f","e27aa94c-fa47-4a58-bc17-1e5d3387b739","ea6c8861-7a39-4e19-8e71-58720131fa8d","eb84cbb3-24d1-4565-9ec1-8bd3b9d4bec9","f1307eae-cbfb-4f04-b6cc-3facd9e296d6","f62defd3-7975-4edf-8f34-40a36b487ac8","f6e3366d-13bc-4a60-94b6-f77a2c2032c0","fdc662ec-5ed7-4d04-8993-6144ff01abc2","oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-4bd4c6831e9c7077","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-66b89ef48f4536a9","oil-7269f661e72c703f","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-9f582ea75e0eddfb","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-b434a85e1e9196d0","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"entries":[{"id":"regulatory_actions:entry:inspection-and-evidence-collection:raid-or-search","name":"Raid or search","definition":"An enforcement visit or search of premises.","occurrences":73,"article_count":70,"event_count":73,"article_ids":["0ea7c6a7-d2c1-498f-aa00-f3fc942206ed","15f9d255-f348-4fb7-ba3d-003ab6adcfb2","1c8fe57c-2cee-4f73-a5f3-6ee4051024e7","229a7f40-f956-476e-8c84-3fd9ed3d6c29","23a5dd2a-a53c-44b8-8b86-37e04d4cf1ee","2d8a95d1-8554-4194-b427-4239c3f9ad5b","2fede3c0-46a7-46e8-a776-5a6fd6d3f08e","31cae76c-aa62-4328-bd40-368275f60e9f","3278338f-1fa0-4045-9701-e237d5ad0930","34dc1c1f-d12c-4230-bb1c-e41b6961f288","368930a7-2085-43bd-bb79-62d471c9e75c","36a70fc6-de5a-494c-9dc5-801fe7a7a53d","3c0e9d23-f858-47eb-8e7a-23db1d42822a","3e325b99-7611-4f89-8963-7f79c5ac4105","411b1d1a-7b18-4425-90f0-da2c296625eb","4216dab3-b436-422a-a6ee-74b5858f7aa2","4726ed7e-d61a-4a2c-9e05-59cbaa4f1bf0","473ed916-1979-4222-b1e8-38d39c51fe03","4f3026f8-7217-4bf9-af6e-71bcad8bb1c5","4fa075c9-a30f-47e5-8f09-158017bfd6d6","504dd102-6089-4fcb-a066-0006720862a7","526515f5-4a82-4b0b-9e1c-7f3a2aa4cde4","52bd3a8a-1c92-484d-8be6-5f7e4a7274e1","57b2326c-e877-4995-82fc-221eda139718","68753b50-8fe7-4499-bb2d-ddfcc7e16c94","6f4adcf4-c63b-41c9-b7f6-0b0f4e75c857","7ddc7283-670a-4dfb-9e38-a11aa0c579c2","86b559ac-3645-468b-9f43-7d961bd255d7","91aa9ca8-e7d7-4036-a22f-5c8c8e7fc2ce","9379cea2-647c-459b-af54-770e31e9bbe1","9c81b00b-87e1-4cce-bfc8-9583b3b8a234","9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","b3e58970-8bf0-4e37-a8f9-dd4fce60bf46","b5940660-7f58-4123-bb25-6f78d4e1694d","c6b3635d-7479-4594-9803-195c9d36f4a1","c8ddee14-df38-49aa-9d85-a7c6b34273a6","c999d71f-777d-4d80-9f37-37391f97acd4","ce0c52be-896a-479c-b92b-09bf3518d332","d301dc8a-7194-46ad-bf04-43efdc78c053","d315d00d-a3eb-4c0f-9554-c1395585910f","e27aa94c-fa47-4a58-bc17-1e5d3387b739","ea6c8861-7a39-4e19-8e71-58720131fa8d","eb84cbb3-24d1-4565-9ec1-8bd3b9d4bec9","f1307eae-cbfb-4f04-b6cc-3facd9e296d6","f62defd3-7975-4edf-8f34-40a36b487ac8","f6e3366d-13bc-4a60-94b6-f77a2c2032c0","fdc662ec-5ed7-4d04-8993-6144ff01abc2","oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-4bd4c6831e9c7077","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-66b89ef48f4536a9","oil-7269f661e72c703f","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-9f582ea75e0eddfb","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"ontology_types":["fbo:RegulatoryAction","fflo:EnforcementAction","fflo:RegulatoryAction","fkg:Action","fkg:RegulatoryAction","fso:RegulatoryAction"],"aliases":["Operation Oil","raid","raid on Singhania oil mill","raided","raids","research","search","search_operation","surprise raid","surprise raids"]},{"id":"regulatory_actions:entry:inspection-and-evidence-collection:sampling-or-testing-order","name":"Sampling or testing order","definition":"Collection of samples or an instruction that samples be tested.","occurrences":17,"article_count":17,"event_count":17,"article_ids":["23a5dd2a-a53c-44b8-8b86-37e04d4cf1ee","2c075e82-3fe3-4b95-a68a-f0fad41e51f5","34dc1c1f-d12c-4230-bb1c-e41b6961f288","508d009a-650f-4e40-b03d-ebef9d2c069e","5118358f-2777-4bfd-a761-adb4bc1da763","51a534c1-9193-4b8c-bbd2-b4e368930ead","706f0136-7ae5-45f2-b804-e3a8c9a14d1c","96621df7-0c9b-41e5-a5a6-3f21a24613d5","9cbf8104-4fa2-4365-bc32-09eb2d1c9381","bf5cf44c-c3df-4c9c-b13b-8a0108b8a106","c66f7c07-f922-4abd-8805-71a0fade560f","db8eb9e3-f6e6-4be4-b6d2-d135a6c3e9ac","oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-b434a85e1e9196d0","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-d6d2041d0727d059"],"ontology_types":["fflo:RegulatoryAction","fkg:RegulatoryAction","fso:Action","fso:RegulatoryAction"],"aliases":["CFTRI identified beta-sitosterol, a marker of vegetable oil adulteration, in ghee samples.","order to collect mustard oil samples for testing","sample collection","sample_collection","samples sent to CFTRI lab for testing","sampling","tests of the samples collected from four tankers revealed the presence of animal fat"]},{"id":"regulatory_actions:entry:inspection-and-evidence-collection:inspection-or-survey","name":"Inspection or survey","definition":"A normalized regulatory actions concept combining 4 extracted labels.","occurrences":15,"article_count":15,"event_count":15,"article_ids":["23a5dd2a-a53c-44b8-8b86-37e04d4cf1ee","508d009a-650f-4e40-b03d-ebef9d2c069e","84a895b3-81ad-42e9-b54d-614c66aca856","9cbf8104-4fa2-4365-bc32-09eb2d1c9381","a18ba308-f8ab-4590-b466-daf80aa2b59c","add15855-56e0-4264-819c-b8e8110846aa","c2853c18-cc20-43b6-bd36-3b77725ba1d7","d2f303e3-c25c-412f-8ae4-4ec525f68736","db8eb9e3-f6e6-4be4-b6d2-d135a6c3e9ac","e1083f09-5ed1-4bdf-8ac5-3c65482b8e5f","oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60"],"ontology_types":["fflo:RegulatoryAction","fkg:RegulatoryAction","fso:RegulatoryAction"],"aliases":["FDA inspection","inspection","inspections of the ghee","survey"]}]},{"id":"regulatory_actions:group:premises-and-licence-controls","name":"Premises and licence controls","definition":"Closure, sealing, operational suspension, or licence action.","occurrences":32,"article_count":30,"event_count":30,"article_ids":["04c00967-a247-4802-b3c2-3f266885c385","05937ca4-de64-422f-ba56-878f6152027c","451d9824-7933-403d-beaa-1ac6398509c9","4974f73f-37bc-4300-8d31-d97ca337365b","4f3026f8-7217-4bf9-af6e-71bcad8bb1c5","a3aeeb23-ea47-454e-9079-05e2142e157d","b4a8aa1a-7262-4318-9579-9fff20f959a6","b556af30-b2db-4273-8b3b-a5b1ec113ebb","b78601e1-6600-408f-bc8c-52407a676ecb","c3aa82e4-0707-4514-a535-22d6d4a7f0b2","c4b35547-a0d3-4cad-b391-177ba64d7c63","caae3943-065a-475a-a6fe-f5706ce3db97","ce0c52be-896a-479c-b92b-09bf3518d332","d18985ea-8239-498e-9147-eda1d0bb8bde","d301dc8a-7194-46ad-bf04-43efdc78c053","fa1e38b4-4ced-4f4b-9a7b-b1b89ff13da7","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-4b88eb2520f8cc22","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","oil-fba2e5ff157abb74"],"entries":[{"id":"regulatory_actions:entry:premises-and-licence-controls:closure-or-sealing","name":"Closure or sealing","definition":"Closure or sealing of premises, storage, equipment, or a business unit.","occurrences":20,"article_count":20,"event_count":20,"article_ids":["4f3026f8-7217-4bf9-af6e-71bcad8bb1c5","a3aeeb23-ea47-454e-9079-05e2142e157d","b4a8aa1a-7262-4318-9579-9fff20f959a6","b556af30-b2db-4273-8b3b-a5b1ec113ebb","c3aa82e4-0707-4514-a535-22d6d4a7f0b2","ce0c52be-896a-479c-b92b-09bf3518d332","d18985ea-8239-498e-9147-eda1d0bb8bde","d301dc8a-7194-46ad-bf04-43efdc78c053","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","oil-fba2e5ff157abb74"],"ontology_types":["fbo:RegulatoryAction","fflo:RegulatoryAction","fkg:RegulatoryAction","fso:RegulatoryAction"],"aliases":["closure","facility sealed","factory sealed","premises sealed","sealed","sealed premises","sealing","sealing of coconut oil unit","sealing of unit","unit sealed","warehouse sealed"]},{"id":"regulatory_actions:entry:premises-and-licence-controls:licence-or-operational-suspension","name":"Licence or operational suspension","definition":"Suspension of a licence or direction to stop operations.","occurrences":12,"article_count":12,"event_count":12,"article_ids":["04c00967-a247-4802-b3c2-3f266885c385","05937ca4-de64-422f-ba56-878f6152027c","451d9824-7933-403d-beaa-1ac6398509c9","4974f73f-37bc-4300-8d31-d97ca337365b","b78601e1-6600-408f-bc8c-52407a676ecb","c4b35547-a0d3-4cad-b391-177ba64d7c63","caae3943-065a-475a-a6fe-f5706ce3db97","fa1e38b4-4ced-4f4b-9a7b-b1b89ff13da7","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-4b88eb2520f8cc22","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497"],"ontology_types":["fflo:RegulatoryAction","fso:RegulatoryAction","regulatory_action"],"aliases":["license suspension","proposal to suspend food safety officer","suspend operations","suspension","suspension of FSSAI licence","suspension of licence","suspension of three dairy licences","temporary suspension of investigation"]}]}]},{"id":"supply_chain_stages","label":"Supply-chain stages","description":"Where the extracted event is situated in the food supply chain.","groups":[{"id":"supply_chain_stages:group:trade-and-distribution","name":"Trade and distribution","definition":"Distribution, import, and export stages.","occurrences":194,"article_count":192,"event_count":194,"article_ids":["008cc0e4-d7d7-475f-80d8-d81621e7b862","0932679a-fe82-4a1e-949e-9d4fd17ed2a0","0a342064-5378-4aff-b4aa-34ae5c1ab66b","0d14295d-a954-4163-8974-ecb51bd464e8","0e518ac8-dc53-4c79-938a-bd26c1142eeb","141518ef-ce68-4969-bb2a-66f56733fab2","15f9d255-f348-4fb7-ba3d-003ab6adcfb2","18f4411e-1d84-42c5-835a-97436ad30c7c","1a806023-ac1d-4da2-924e-25821c2554f5","1b1069d2-3f50-4dd3-a8bd-0aeed6bacf98","1c7ea343-020a-4266-9854-b12ebfa2cf50","1c8fe57c-2cee-4f73-a5f3-6ee4051024e7","1de4a13b-1497-421e-b5bc-a8ebbc7a3b18","1df33743-1016-49ce-981b-862125c0893f","1e6b9f5b-a065-4242-ae58-1f105455955f","1fe9639d-5c39-472e-94a7-73ac2b03bfce","2010c6e2-c9cb-4a3e-b22b-8cabf1044074","21fb2b00-9b86-4924-9a0d-248f976cfd93","22261df7-8974-447f-a1cf-192c59528f64","2255e304-d6ef-4707-b594-cbc3955019ec","22bf4101-c33b-4711-b6e3-379968f7c217","23ff1efe-782a-4174-8f33-41a3ff0e8c44","2499d49c-748f-41d8-84d9-eed7a66ad43a","255ac21d-c17e-4926-9dad-13db7698ed72","26ac5726-fd69-42b8-a80e-6a71b91ba466","29a173b3-4587-4257-9c93-2f0c483079c5","2a59f77c-89ba-49fe-be6c-b3c9756a9940","301bb818-ff44-4346-9ffe-ad58bf13cfb2","31cae76c-aa62-4328-bd40-368275f60e9f","3278338f-1fa0-4045-9701-e237d5ad0930","3282adec-c328-4317-a091-a126587d78de","32bc8e29-1313-4d9b-86ff-8c3bb665f057","33326887-4ed0-4562-a0ac-b889d6ad53a9","3624ed70-d464-4caa-9b4e-4dfc2ed435dc","36a70fc6-de5a-494c-9dc5-801fe7a7a53d","3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","39e61860-2a60-448c-838e-a7f01e4d0c5c","3c0e9d23-f858-47eb-8e7a-23db1d42822a","3cdd0ffb-841b-4883-9b1a-df7b28022554","4216dab3-b436-422a-a6ee-74b5858f7aa2","445ff19b-5429-4a55-be3f-c4b03481b04f","47635cd8-696c-4adf-94ed-338f084a3d62","4a638904-2bcf-4037-8afd-ec6e5b0b6b11","4c67d899-fab5-4e78-9274-526d6a4fe0bb","4cd73621-691c-4866-91c1-0b99d0d1a89a","4d7063c6-5201-4ce1-89ed-75ee21d51b98","4eb18b90-e310-48db-9531-68b146420749","4fa075c9-a30f-47e5-8f09-158017bfd6d6","502ff9a1-ac00-4ef2-96cb-0a0614085766","526515f5-4a82-4b0b-9e1c-7f3a2aa4cde4","534ab39c-32c3-46ea-a742-5095170a0003","5406e730-2d78-47b4-ba27-fc933e691eab","54686005-b842-4cc5-82b1-0276e36a42b6","55552c00-e696-4ac2-951e-156364cb1337","58ac029e-4204-42c4-8ff3-6dbd84dd382a","590fff58-7ba9-4a5b-8232-4c27d67f13b1","5a7bde0b-59e0-4f86-9b63-2bbebb593d41","5d222c9b-8733-4d3b-abaa-59f77da35546","5fa4530c-d60b-48c1-b6b2-371abff6d77a","6135126e-45b3-4fe7-a80f-82248b08ea7b","62bc0e3c-1d90-4688-bc1b-e00f620c5c8c","634a0a0f-0899-427f-9396-6cc3c5442643","6411a3a1-2932-41eb-b497-f9a2400de74c","6721b632-2b4f-492a-840d-bb05d2a9f1af","672ecfdb-cb9d-485d-8fc1-76e6a8269fe7","68753b50-8fe7-4499-bb2d-ddfcc7e16c94","6ab671c9-310c-4d88-bd88-0251180b2345","6ee56cf3-78f2-4420-bede-08f76397b2fb","6f4adcf4-c63b-41c9-b7f6-0b0f4e75c857","70b9c7ef-3983-40dd-b904-5607537ff37f","71196507-ad87-406f-a4df-edc8a14b1575","73369c4a-c44b-4b7a-b3cc-07766ccb4e2a","73e97a89-5b5f-4104-bc6a-50b8f564040a","75f7eb04-35fe-48ce-af4a-d0ccf3067076","7a707681-5edc-461c-b5a8-0057a374f3cc","8151434e-f600-47a9-93df-16b483e88961","815dcb75-691c-4066-a898-b7ed46fdbdf2","824601ea-5309-4ddf-bc61-486c992e309c","835cbabf-d424-4f04-89cb-1d8c0b08f1ab","83bf777b-6ee5-4e82-bd85-6e374853473a","84512e93-e51a-4c89-88dd-ecc2afc0699a","84a895b3-81ad-42e9-b54d-614c66aca856","84ea460e-bfc2-4977-aebb-32594a90693b","8577ca11-d1ef-4517-846f-747a51b46f07","8779026e-22f2-4276-a7b9-695e4e569057","8b1ef2e6-f7a2-4db0-9589-42159cf06574","8ef8782e-cc91-4ddc-95d5-d260f1b7a518","9285d418-e4e3-40a1-b1d1-da857748bfd3","94d114b9-3c47-468e-8714-ed449f90e8e4","95044e07-ad37-43f6-95b0-cebe1e9f8ce0","95b8351c-9ddb-457d-9035-ad3b6d181dc7","96621df7-0c9b-41e5-a5a6-3f21a24613d5","9c74f902-2ef0-4269-b436-acc19aa11ea5","9c81b00b-87e1-4cce-bfc8-9583b3b8a234","9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","9d92713b-a9c4-4b7e-87f4-c4fd443e38b5","9f454843-a34c-4619-a576-493f835993b4","a06cd968-9dc5-42c5-a6e8-3d3c36dfc8c2","a3aeeb23-ea47-454e-9079-05e2142e157d","a3ce7cd2-ee71-42ce-b4f7-96a81c6bd295","a45c3495-d077-4241-b1d7-72fa109d0e6b","a6385d09-ca9d-4f95-b5ba-4f50630bec35","ab7d0ab2-d774-415c-bd3f-a606f92ef3c3","ac5e071a-48a2-4a53-a1f6-5fc7b6d35280","adad636e-6844-49cb-bb07-54ff4f1a044f","add15855-56e0-4264-819c-b8e8110846aa","adfa4015-b34e-4488-99e4-b20b4dc10324","aec84261-126b-4386-b0f4-15f160ca67ae","b3e58970-8bf0-4e37-a8f9-dd4fce60bf46","b4b614f7-a43d-4e57-9766-25f7fef90d68","b5940660-7f58-4123-bb25-6f78d4e1694d","bc813ec4-3453-4fe2-a5d0-884fdb51bfc7","bcd183c8-344e-4cb8-8561-8c2e6a027897","bcd80071-6449-4036-accf-62939d2bc771","bdc8358e-29a2-4efa-a99e-6023a27df35b","c0981bc0-6d81-46d5-a2fc-715c6a5662b8","c2853c18-cc20-43b6-bd36-3b77725ba1d7","c2875090-e4c1-4cec-be8a-7218c8774f6b","c51ad2dc-5440-4692-bdac-73968c6ad4d2","c5597192-fe4a-479a-8bf7-cdcf15d74d10","c6e1c64f-1094-4a24-9d3e-8103fb4d94ab","c6e6e3f3-bc85-48dc-ad18-bb08d31d7308","c7af7c66-9a6d-42c8-8695-bcd164ed856b","c999d71f-777d-4d80-9f37-37391f97acd4","caae3943-065a-475a-a6fe-f5706ce3db97","cddf4a6a-4d4e-4d8b-9631-734b807f7215","cf1f664f-fab8-46ef-9768-c3fc897d3913","cf35dad3-c846-4c5e-91db-577efd256f78","d18985ea-8239-498e-9147-eda1d0bb8bde","d301dc8a-7194-46ad-bf04-43efdc78c053","d5ff3294-0ecd-48eb-b9dd-a2c0282a055a","dab486f0-dfe1-46a8-b0d8-32e2a200b8e8","dc9b6179-78d1-4eec-9df7-47aadc6c4002","ddada193-97b9-4ccc-8a51-bfbea77a0c06","e06bafea-36a4-40ac-8e47-2a2619fd46fd","e1bbca7c-14db-40cf-a128-0219f12466a3","e256486b-ee32-4d0f-9cba-d02bf4bd780a","e2f38cc3-06ff-4db2-8aad-a537c1e1d0c8","e57d61a5-e3ec-423d-ad96-243fbfae502b","e6e7e00b-0ede-4741-8419-066a93e431cd","e70df749-9305-44b3-8a30-defc332a7fa4","e9029bad-f0af-4178-8545-61b8bf20d98f","ed2c35d4-102a-4b73-8382-2ac35610faed","eec20343-5ffa-486c-b431-59ca5e4568d4","ef391115-fde1-44aa-ab00-abb8e2e7ec82","efb7c5ac-4ac5-4964-80cb-f95ebaa0e04c","f1307eae-cbfb-4f04-b6cc-3facd9e296d6","f25f2d19-18b4-4e7e-ad7b-8f30a193b3d6","f267ac1f-eff8-417a-8920-f8d37e384f79","f289c668-0c40-41e6-82af-ae6829b262d4","f319102d-533a-41ff-9f08-6bda6778bb7e","f5c77efa-f72b-424c-a810-81cd552ba3de","f62defd3-7975-4edf-8f34-40a36b487ac8","f6e3366d-13bc-4a60-94b6-f77a2c2032c0","fa1e38b4-4ced-4f4b-9a7b-b1b89ff13da7","fb4d21e7-be93-4775-905f-977427db28c4","fe4e9bc0-2802-4dd8-97e4-27704fad2a1b","oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-7269f661e72c703f","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-846611108e27fafb","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-a9685f88d15906f6","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-fc5474312cf8529f","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"entries":[{"id":"supply_chain_stages:entry:trade-and-distribution:distribution","name":"Distribution","definition":"A normalized supply-chain stages concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":191,"article_count":189,"event_count":191,"article_ids":["008cc0e4-d7d7-475f-80d8-d81621e7b862","0932679a-fe82-4a1e-949e-9d4fd17ed2a0","0a342064-5378-4aff-b4aa-34ae5c1ab66b","0d14295d-a954-4163-8974-ecb51bd464e8","0e518ac8-dc53-4c79-938a-bd26c1142eeb","141518ef-ce68-4969-bb2a-66f56733fab2","15f9d255-f348-4fb7-ba3d-003ab6adcfb2","18f4411e-1d84-42c5-835a-97436ad30c7c","1a806023-ac1d-4da2-924e-25821c2554f5","1b1069d2-3f50-4dd3-a8bd-0aeed6bacf98","1c7ea343-020a-4266-9854-b12ebfa2cf50","1c8fe57c-2cee-4f73-a5f3-6ee4051024e7","1de4a13b-1497-421e-b5bc-a8ebbc7a3b18","1df33743-1016-49ce-981b-862125c0893f","1e6b9f5b-a065-4242-ae58-1f105455955f","1fe9639d-5c39-472e-94a7-73ac2b03bfce","2010c6e2-c9cb-4a3e-b22b-8cabf1044074","21fb2b00-9b86-4924-9a0d-248f976cfd93","22261df7-8974-447f-a1cf-192c59528f64","2255e304-d6ef-4707-b594-cbc3955019ec","22bf4101-c33b-4711-b6e3-379968f7c217","23ff1efe-782a-4174-8f33-41a3ff0e8c44","2499d49c-748f-41d8-84d9-eed7a66ad43a","255ac21d-c17e-4926-9dad-13db7698ed72","26ac5726-fd69-42b8-a80e-6a71b91ba466","29a173b3-4587-4257-9c93-2f0c483079c5","2a59f77c-89ba-49fe-be6c-b3c9756a9940","301bb818-ff44-4346-9ffe-ad58bf13cfb2","31cae76c-aa62-4328-bd40-368275f60e9f","3278338f-1fa0-4045-9701-e237d5ad0930","3282adec-c328-4317-a091-a126587d78de","32bc8e29-1313-4d9b-86ff-8c3bb665f057","33326887-4ed0-4562-a0ac-b889d6ad53a9","3624ed70-d464-4caa-9b4e-4dfc2ed435dc","36a70fc6-de5a-494c-9dc5-801fe7a7a53d","3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","39e61860-2a60-448c-838e-a7f01e4d0c5c","3c0e9d23-f858-47eb-8e7a-23db1d42822a","3cdd0ffb-841b-4883-9b1a-df7b28022554","4216dab3-b436-422a-a6ee-74b5858f7aa2","445ff19b-5429-4a55-be3f-c4b03481b04f","47635cd8-696c-4adf-94ed-338f084a3d62","4a638904-2bcf-4037-8afd-ec6e5b0b6b11","4c67d899-fab5-4e78-9274-526d6a4fe0bb","4cd73621-691c-4866-91c1-0b99d0d1a89a","4d7063c6-5201-4ce1-89ed-75ee21d51b98","4eb18b90-e310-48db-9531-68b146420749","4fa075c9-a30f-47e5-8f09-158017bfd6d6","502ff9a1-ac00-4ef2-96cb-0a0614085766","526515f5-4a82-4b0b-9e1c-7f3a2aa4cde4","534ab39c-32c3-46ea-a742-5095170a0003","5406e730-2d78-47b4-ba27-fc933e691eab","54686005-b842-4cc5-82b1-0276e36a42b6","55552c00-e696-4ac2-951e-156364cb1337","58ac029e-4204-42c4-8ff3-6dbd84dd382a","590fff58-7ba9-4a5b-8232-4c27d67f13b1","5a7bde0b-59e0-4f86-9b63-2bbebb593d41","5d222c9b-8733-4d3b-abaa-59f77da35546","5fa4530c-d60b-48c1-b6b2-371abff6d77a","6135126e-45b3-4fe7-a80f-82248b08ea7b","634a0a0f-0899-427f-9396-6cc3c5442643","6411a3a1-2932-41eb-b497-f9a2400de74c","6721b632-2b4f-492a-840d-bb05d2a9f1af","672ecfdb-cb9d-485d-8fc1-76e6a8269fe7","68753b50-8fe7-4499-bb2d-ddfcc7e16c94","6ab671c9-310c-4d88-bd88-0251180b2345","6ee56cf3-78f2-4420-bede-08f76397b2fb","6f4adcf4-c63b-41c9-b7f6-0b0f4e75c857","70b9c7ef-3983-40dd-b904-5607537ff37f","71196507-ad87-406f-a4df-edc8a14b1575","73369c4a-c44b-4b7a-b3cc-07766ccb4e2a","73e97a89-5b5f-4104-bc6a-50b8f564040a","75f7eb04-35fe-48ce-af4a-d0ccf3067076","7a707681-5edc-461c-b5a8-0057a374f3cc","8151434e-f600-47a9-93df-16b483e88961","815dcb75-691c-4066-a898-b7ed46fdbdf2","824601ea-5309-4ddf-bc61-486c992e309c","835cbabf-d424-4f04-89cb-1d8c0b08f1ab","83bf777b-6ee5-4e82-bd85-6e374853473a","84512e93-e51a-4c89-88dd-ecc2afc0699a","84a895b3-81ad-42e9-b54d-614c66aca856","84ea460e-bfc2-4977-aebb-32594a90693b","8577ca11-d1ef-4517-846f-747a51b46f07","8779026e-22f2-4276-a7b9-695e4e569057","8b1ef2e6-f7a2-4db0-9589-42159cf06574","8ef8782e-cc91-4ddc-95d5-d260f1b7a518","9285d418-e4e3-40a1-b1d1-da857748bfd3","94d114b9-3c47-468e-8714-ed449f90e8e4","95044e07-ad37-43f6-95b0-cebe1e9f8ce0","95b8351c-9ddb-457d-9035-ad3b6d181dc7","96621df7-0c9b-41e5-a5a6-3f21a24613d5","9c74f902-2ef0-4269-b436-acc19aa11ea5","9c81b00b-87e1-4cce-bfc8-9583b3b8a234","9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","9d92713b-a9c4-4b7e-87f4-c4fd443e38b5","9f454843-a34c-4619-a576-493f835993b4","a06cd968-9dc5-42c5-a6e8-3d3c36dfc8c2","a3aeeb23-ea47-454e-9079-05e2142e157d","a3ce7cd2-ee71-42ce-b4f7-96a81c6bd295","a45c3495-d077-4241-b1d7-72fa109d0e6b","a6385d09-ca9d-4f95-b5ba-4f50630bec35","ab7d0ab2-d774-415c-bd3f-a606f92ef3c3","ac5e071a-48a2-4a53-a1f6-5fc7b6d35280","adad636e-6844-49cb-bb07-54ff4f1a044f","add15855-56e0-4264-819c-b8e8110846aa","adfa4015-b34e-4488-99e4-b20b4dc10324","aec84261-126b-4386-b0f4-15f160ca67ae","b3e58970-8bf0-4e37-a8f9-dd4fce60bf46","b4b614f7-a43d-4e57-9766-25f7fef90d68","b5940660-7f58-4123-bb25-6f78d4e1694d","bc813ec4-3453-4fe2-a5d0-884fdb51bfc7","bcd183c8-344e-4cb8-8561-8c2e6a027897","bcd80071-6449-4036-accf-62939d2bc771","bdc8358e-29a2-4efa-a99e-6023a27df35b","c0981bc0-6d81-46d5-a2fc-715c6a5662b8","c2853c18-cc20-43b6-bd36-3b77725ba1d7","c2875090-e4c1-4cec-be8a-7218c8774f6b","c51ad2dc-5440-4692-bdac-73968c6ad4d2","c5597192-fe4a-479a-8bf7-cdcf15d74d10","c6e1c64f-1094-4a24-9d3e-8103fb4d94ab","c6e6e3f3-bc85-48dc-ad18-bb08d31d7308","c7af7c66-9a6d-42c8-8695-bcd164ed856b","c999d71f-777d-4d80-9f37-37391f97acd4","caae3943-065a-475a-a6fe-f5706ce3db97","cddf4a6a-4d4e-4d8b-9631-734b807f7215","cf1f664f-fab8-46ef-9768-c3fc897d3913","cf35dad3-c846-4c5e-91db-577efd256f78","d18985ea-8239-498e-9147-eda1d0bb8bde","d301dc8a-7194-46ad-bf04-43efdc78c053","d5ff3294-0ecd-48eb-b9dd-a2c0282a055a","dab486f0-dfe1-46a8-b0d8-32e2a200b8e8","dc9b6179-78d1-4eec-9df7-47aadc6c4002","ddada193-97b9-4ccc-8a51-bfbea77a0c06","e06bafea-36a4-40ac-8e47-2a2619fd46fd","e1bbca7c-14db-40cf-a128-0219f12466a3","e256486b-ee32-4d0f-9cba-d02bf4bd780a","e2f38cc3-06ff-4db2-8aad-a537c1e1d0c8","e57d61a5-e3ec-423d-ad96-243fbfae502b","e6e7e00b-0ede-4741-8419-066a93e431cd","e70df749-9305-44b3-8a30-defc332a7fa4","e9029bad-f0af-4178-8545-61b8bf20d98f","ed2c35d4-102a-4b73-8382-2ac35610faed","eec20343-5ffa-486c-b431-59ca5e4568d4","ef391115-fde1-44aa-ab00-abb8e2e7ec82","efb7c5ac-4ac5-4964-80cb-f95ebaa0e04c","f1307eae-cbfb-4f04-b6cc-3facd9e296d6","f25f2d19-18b4-4e7e-ad7b-8f30a193b3d6","f267ac1f-eff8-417a-8920-f8d37e384f79","f289c668-0c40-41e6-82af-ae6829b262d4","f319102d-533a-41ff-9f08-6bda6778bb7e","f5c77efa-f72b-424c-a810-81cd552ba3de","f62defd3-7975-4edf-8f34-40a36b487ac8","f6e3366d-13bc-4a60-94b6-f77a2c2032c0","fa1e38b4-4ced-4f4b-9a7b-b1b89ff13da7","fb4d21e7-be93-4775-905f-977427db28c4","fe4e9bc0-2802-4dd8-97e4-27704fad2a1b","oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-7269f661e72c703f","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-846611108e27fafb","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-a9685f88d15906f6","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-fc5474312cf8529f","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["distribution"]},{"id":"supply_chain_stages:entry:trade-and-distribution:import","name":"Import","definition":"A normalized supply-chain stages concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["62bc0e3c-1d90-4688-bc1b-e00f620c5c8c","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["import"]},{"id":"supply_chain_stages:entry:trade-and-distribution:export","name":"Export","definition":"A normalized supply-chain stages concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-a7080ed266c36f88"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["export"]}]},{"id":"supply_chain_stages:group:upstream-supply-chain","name":"Upstream supply chain","definition":"Primary production stages.","occurrences":154,"article_count":154,"event_count":154,"article_ids":["0109eea0-3adc-4177-a6f7-e3bc31bf237d","04c00967-a247-4802-b3c2-3f266885c385","0d14295d-a954-4163-8974-ecb51bd464e8","0e518ac8-dc53-4c79-938a-bd26c1142eeb","0facca96-d90c-4f21-ba98-356f7f6b1622","15f9d255-f348-4fb7-ba3d-003ab6adcfb2","1931e9b4-edf1-42ec-a9c4-00ff0cbcff9a","1a806023-ac1d-4da2-924e-25821c2554f5","1addfba0-b7e9-4722-85be-a642cdf63571","1b1069d2-3f50-4dd3-a8bd-0aeed6bacf98","1de4a13b-1497-421e-b5bc-a8ebbc7a3b18","1df33743-1016-49ce-981b-862125c0893f","2010c6e2-c9cb-4a3e-b22b-8cabf1044074","2013c452-d1c8-41a0-abea-92e26d231790","21fb2b00-9b86-4924-9a0d-248f976cfd93","22261df7-8974-447f-a1cf-192c59528f64","229a7f40-f956-476e-8c84-3fd9ed3d6c29","23a5dd2a-a53c-44b8-8b86-37e04d4cf1ee","2499d49c-748f-41d8-84d9-eed7a66ad43a","2a59f77c-89ba-49fe-be6c-b3c9756a9940","2d8a95d1-8554-4194-b427-4239c3f9ad5b","2fede3c0-46a7-46e8-a776-5a6fd6d3f08e","301bb818-ff44-4346-9ffe-ad58bf13cfb2","3278338f-1fa0-4045-9701-e237d5ad0930","33326887-4ed0-4562-a0ac-b889d6ad53a9","3865528e-cbb8-4615-af7d-f9ab01e9fe4d","39e61860-2a60-448c-838e-a7f01e4d0c5c","3c0e9d23-f858-47eb-8e7a-23db1d42822a","3e2829b3-2380-49cb-a370-77a313e8eaa1","3f674523-5416-4b89-8cab-fe3ddf3c9e7e","4216dab3-b436-422a-a6ee-74b5858f7aa2","43de8661-2844-46b7-bb39-15eb17f6b82e","451d9824-7933-403d-beaa-1ac6398509c9","471bc3da-bbd4-417c-875a-595a713be7fd","4726ed7e-d61a-4a2c-9e05-59cbaa4f1bf0","473ed916-1979-4222-b1e8-38d39c51fe03","4a638904-2bcf-4037-8afd-ec6e5b0b6b11","4d7063c6-5201-4ce1-89ed-75ee21d51b98","4f3026f8-7217-4bf9-af6e-71bcad8bb1c5","4fa075c9-a30f-47e5-8f09-158017bfd6d6","502ff9a1-ac00-4ef2-96cb-0a0614085766","52bd3a8a-1c92-484d-8be6-5f7e4a7274e1","55552c00-e696-4ac2-951e-156364cb1337","5710a503-9fbe-46ae-abd5-2663069b70db","58163259-bc87-4025-a6cc-f3a0848b52cf","5a7bde0b-59e0-4f86-9b63-2bbebb593d41","5c86116b-5fae-45a9-b467-01fc8b26a166","5f6c5fd0-a2f8-4bfe-9ac4-a8d06bc8640a","61a00782-20f7-4170-b4e2-d9d9157b3a3c","620bfde0-ec72-4b52-bfa4-e06ce3b56960","6721b632-2b4f-492a-840d-bb05d2a9f1af","672ecfdb-cb9d-485d-8fc1-76e6a8269fe7","6ee56cf3-78f2-4420-bede-08f76397b2fb","706246bb-b5c8-4d73-81fa-2e93d040c762","73369c4a-c44b-4b7a-b3cc-07766ccb4e2a","75eac450-5d76-45da-975a-a47f1515ca01","75f7eb04-35fe-48ce-af4a-d0ccf3067076","7855cb39-b177-4d3b-bd72-0a18afd5415b","79f059b8-00b2-4345-ad46-440c7bc371df","7a707681-5edc-461c-b5a8-0057a374f3cc","7b3b345d-0902-4461-a6bc-747c26feb7f2","815dcb75-691c-4066-a898-b7ed46fdbdf2","8187d86e-f46c-4e26-8188-a4e7b31de2f6","8205ac1a-be22-438c-b3e0-f7aa463d3501","835cbabf-d424-4f04-89cb-1d8c0b08f1ab","83bf777b-6ee5-4e82-bd85-6e374853473a","84a895b3-81ad-42e9-b54d-614c66aca856","85680853-3899-4f21-b262-dbe3e8893779","86b559ac-3645-468b-9f43-7d961bd255d7","897c7de9-ed19-4ee2-a2d5-85b75355519d","8aaa4093-987c-4a1d-8fbd-8e1d1e495fe3","8d8b9ba9-5da4-4861-89db-348400c8ef68","8e4f2f4a-8039-4ba0-9b6d-beecad106136","8ef8782e-cc91-4ddc-95d5-d260f1b7a518","91aa9ca8-e7d7-4036-a22f-5c8c8e7fc2ce","9379cea2-647c-459b-af54-770e31e9bbe1","93c87fee-61ec-4ea8-bd4f-3434669835ee","93ec7040-a06c-4da5-b0b1-626399456a8a","94d114b9-3c47-468e-8714-ed449f90e8e4","94faca18-b471-4748-8bab-f399641cedbd","96adc5c1-5a68-473e-9d38-85bed792c8fc","9c74f902-2ef0-4269-b436-acc19aa11ea5","9c81b00b-87e1-4cce-bfc8-9583b3b8a234","9d92713b-a9c4-4b7e-87f4-c4fd443e38b5","9f454843-a34c-4619-a576-493f835993b4","9fe3b91d-3719-4260-926a-d5711bd1efc4","a3aeeb23-ea47-454e-9079-05e2142e157d","a3ce7cd2-ee71-42ce-b4f7-96a81c6bd295","a45c3495-d077-4241-b1d7-72fa109d0e6b","aa57f0d8-8cb4-4c4c-8ef4-4c4acdef25e4","ab7d0ab2-d774-415c-bd3f-a606f92ef3c3","b26721cc-ba4b-460e-a726-17bebda4c82e","b4a8aa1a-7262-4318-9579-9fff20f959a6","b5940660-7f58-4123-bb25-6f78d4e1694d","b78601e1-6600-408f-bc8c-52407a676ecb","bcd183c8-344e-4cb8-8561-8c2e6a027897","bdc8358e-29a2-4efa-a99e-6023a27df35b","c0981bc0-6d81-46d5-a2fc-715c6a5662b8","c2853c18-cc20-43b6-bd36-3b77725ba1d7","c2875090-e4c1-4cec-be8a-7218c8774f6b","c4b35547-a0d3-4cad-b391-177ba64d7c63","c5597192-fe4a-479a-8bf7-cdcf15d74d10","c6b3635d-7479-4594-9803-195c9d36f4a1","c6e6e3f3-bc85-48dc-ad18-bb08d31d7308","c7af7c66-9a6d-42c8-8695-bcd164ed856b","c8ddee14-df38-49aa-9d85-a7c6b34273a6","c999d71f-777d-4d80-9f37-37391f97acd4","cbdf7850-c12b-44e7-9a2a-2e88994f389f","cddf4a6a-4d4e-4d8b-9631-734b807f7215","ce0c52be-896a-479c-b92b-09bf3518d332","cf1f664f-fab8-46ef-9768-c3fc897d3913","d156577c-5001-4f1b-90f7-d7b21a37497b","d18985ea-8239-498e-9147-eda1d0bb8bde","d301dc8a-7194-46ad-bf04-43efdc78c053","d3bd5582-331f-4b89-96d8-d988dabaecd2","d7c49d74-0c9c-470b-94ad-c7ccaa111eaf","dab486f0-dfe1-46a8-b0d8-32e2a200b8e8","dc9b6179-78d1-4eec-9df7-47aadc6c4002","dd99547d-81d1-4764-ba78-52a1cddf906d","ddada193-97b9-4ccc-8a51-bfbea77a0c06","e27aa94c-fa47-4a58-bc17-1e5d3387b739","e446ef0a-2a74-42bf-bcd6-2b793506650e","e6d36e44-00e2-4f9e-95b1-e892e44117eb","e70df749-9305-44b3-8a30-defc332a7fa4","e9029bad-f0af-4178-8545-61b8bf20d98f","ea0bba2c-7a56-40f2-afac-00f638b54fc3","ea51c75b-4b85-48fb-bbb7-8fde23c110aa","eb7f5240-b11f-4c58-9681-91c05d2c3f50","ed2c35d4-102a-4b73-8382-2ac35610faed","efb7c5ac-4ac5-4964-80cb-f95ebaa0e04c","f24f8cd0-0ca1-49cf-8cf1-4a5e6b938fe3","f319102d-533a-41ff-9f08-6bda6778bb7e","f6e3366d-13bc-4a60-94b6-f77a2c2032c0","f75dd4aa-d0bc-4078-857d-76a41f9df08f","fc91133d-e4b6-4458-8d6c-cb1af7bcd97e","oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-1852e8a212bd5903","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-63426d939d718e7f","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-86a403aef71f924e","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-ce4031737a7654b3","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a"],"entries":[{"id":"supply_chain_stages:entry:upstream-supply-chain:production","name":"Production","definition":"A normalized supply-chain stages concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":154,"article_count":154,"event_count":154,"article_ids":["0109eea0-3adc-4177-a6f7-e3bc31bf237d","04c00967-a247-4802-b3c2-3f266885c385","0d14295d-a954-4163-8974-ecb51bd464e8","0e518ac8-dc53-4c79-938a-bd26c1142eeb","0facca96-d90c-4f21-ba98-356f7f6b1622","15f9d255-f348-4fb7-ba3d-003ab6adcfb2","1931e9b4-edf1-42ec-a9c4-00ff0cbcff9a","1a806023-ac1d-4da2-924e-25821c2554f5","1addfba0-b7e9-4722-85be-a642cdf63571","1b1069d2-3f50-4dd3-a8bd-0aeed6bacf98","1de4a13b-1497-421e-b5bc-a8ebbc7a3b18","1df33743-1016-49ce-981b-862125c0893f","2010c6e2-c9cb-4a3e-b22b-8cabf1044074","2013c452-d1c8-41a0-abea-92e26d231790","21fb2b00-9b86-4924-9a0d-248f976cfd93","22261df7-8974-447f-a1cf-192c59528f64","229a7f40-f956-476e-8c84-3fd9ed3d6c29","23a5dd2a-a53c-44b8-8b86-37e04d4cf1ee","2499d49c-748f-41d8-84d9-eed7a66ad43a","2a59f77c-89ba-49fe-be6c-b3c9756a9940","2d8a95d1-8554-4194-b427-4239c3f9ad5b","2fede3c0-46a7-46e8-a776-5a6fd6d3f08e","301bb818-ff44-4346-9ffe-ad58bf13cfb2","3278338f-1fa0-4045-9701-e237d5ad0930","33326887-4ed0-4562-a0ac-b889d6ad53a9","3865528e-cbb8-4615-af7d-f9ab01e9fe4d","39e61860-2a60-448c-838e-a7f01e4d0c5c","3c0e9d23-f858-47eb-8e7a-23db1d42822a","3e2829b3-2380-49cb-a370-77a313e8eaa1","3f674523-5416-4b89-8cab-fe3ddf3c9e7e","4216dab3-b436-422a-a6ee-74b5858f7aa2","43de8661-2844-46b7-bb39-15eb17f6b82e","451d9824-7933-403d-beaa-1ac6398509c9","471bc3da-bbd4-417c-875a-595a713be7fd","4726ed7e-d61a-4a2c-9e05-59cbaa4f1bf0","473ed916-1979-4222-b1e8-38d39c51fe03","4a638904-2bcf-4037-8afd-ec6e5b0b6b11","4d7063c6-5201-4ce1-89ed-75ee21d51b98","4f3026f8-7217-4bf9-af6e-71bcad8bb1c5","4fa075c9-a30f-47e5-8f09-158017bfd6d6","502ff9a1-ac00-4ef2-96cb-0a0614085766","52bd3a8a-1c92-484d-8be6-5f7e4a7274e1","55552c00-e696-4ac2-951e-156364cb1337","5710a503-9fbe-46ae-abd5-2663069b70db","58163259-bc87-4025-a6cc-f3a0848b52cf","5a7bde0b-59e0-4f86-9b63-2bbebb593d41","5c86116b-5fae-45a9-b467-01fc8b26a166","5f6c5fd0-a2f8-4bfe-9ac4-a8d06bc8640a","61a00782-20f7-4170-b4e2-d9d9157b3a3c","620bfde0-ec72-4b52-bfa4-e06ce3b56960","6721b632-2b4f-492a-840d-bb05d2a9f1af","672ecfdb-cb9d-485d-8fc1-76e6a8269fe7","6ee56cf3-78f2-4420-bede-08f76397b2fb","706246bb-b5c8-4d73-81fa-2e93d040c762","73369c4a-c44b-4b7a-b3cc-07766ccb4e2a","75eac450-5d76-45da-975a-a47f1515ca01","75f7eb04-35fe-48ce-af4a-d0ccf3067076","7855cb39-b177-4d3b-bd72-0a18afd5415b","79f059b8-00b2-4345-ad46-440c7bc371df","7a707681-5edc-461c-b5a8-0057a374f3cc","7b3b345d-0902-4461-a6bc-747c26feb7f2","815dcb75-691c-4066-a898-b7ed46fdbdf2","8187d86e-f46c-4e26-8188-a4e7b31de2f6","8205ac1a-be22-438c-b3e0-f7aa463d3501","835cbabf-d424-4f04-89cb-1d8c0b08f1ab","83bf777b-6ee5-4e82-bd85-6e374853473a","84a895b3-81ad-42e9-b54d-614c66aca856","85680853-3899-4f21-b262-dbe3e8893779","86b559ac-3645-468b-9f43-7d961bd255d7","897c7de9-ed19-4ee2-a2d5-85b75355519d","8aaa4093-987c-4a1d-8fbd-8e1d1e495fe3","8d8b9ba9-5da4-4861-89db-348400c8ef68","8e4f2f4a-8039-4ba0-9b6d-beecad106136","8ef8782e-cc91-4ddc-95d5-d260f1b7a518","91aa9ca8-e7d7-4036-a22f-5c8c8e7fc2ce","9379cea2-647c-459b-af54-770e31e9bbe1","93c87fee-61ec-4ea8-bd4f-3434669835ee","93ec7040-a06c-4da5-b0b1-626399456a8a","94d114b9-3c47-468e-8714-ed449f90e8e4","94faca18-b471-4748-8bab-f399641cedbd","96adc5c1-5a68-473e-9d38-85bed792c8fc","9c74f902-2ef0-4269-b436-acc19aa11ea5","9c81b00b-87e1-4cce-bfc8-9583b3b8a234","9d92713b-a9c4-4b7e-87f4-c4fd443e38b5","9f454843-a34c-4619-a576-493f835993b4","9fe3b91d-3719-4260-926a-d5711bd1efc4","a3aeeb23-ea47-454e-9079-05e2142e157d","a3ce7cd2-ee71-42ce-b4f7-96a81c6bd295","a45c3495-d077-4241-b1d7-72fa109d0e6b","aa57f0d8-8cb4-4c4c-8ef4-4c4acdef25e4","ab7d0ab2-d774-415c-bd3f-a606f92ef3c3","b26721cc-ba4b-460e-a726-17bebda4c82e","b4a8aa1a-7262-4318-9579-9fff20f959a6","b5940660-7f58-4123-bb25-6f78d4e1694d","b78601e1-6600-408f-bc8c-52407a676ecb","bcd183c8-344e-4cb8-8561-8c2e6a027897","bdc8358e-29a2-4efa-a99e-6023a27df35b","c0981bc0-6d81-46d5-a2fc-715c6a5662b8","c2853c18-cc20-43b6-bd36-3b77725ba1d7","c2875090-e4c1-4cec-be8a-7218c8774f6b","c4b35547-a0d3-4cad-b391-177ba64d7c63","c5597192-fe4a-479a-8bf7-cdcf15d74d10","c6b3635d-7479-4594-9803-195c9d36f4a1","c6e6e3f3-bc85-48dc-ad18-bb08d31d7308","c7af7c66-9a6d-42c8-8695-bcd164ed856b","c8ddee14-df38-49aa-9d85-a7c6b34273a6","c999d71f-777d-4d80-9f37-37391f97acd4","cbdf7850-c12b-44e7-9a2a-2e88994f389f","cddf4a6a-4d4e-4d8b-9631-734b807f7215","ce0c52be-896a-479c-b92b-09bf3518d332","cf1f664f-fab8-46ef-9768-c3fc897d3913","d156577c-5001-4f1b-90f7-d7b21a37497b","d18985ea-8239-498e-9147-eda1d0bb8bde","d301dc8a-7194-46ad-bf04-43efdc78c053","d3bd5582-331f-4b89-96d8-d988dabaecd2","d7c49d74-0c9c-470b-94ad-c7ccaa111eaf","dab486f0-dfe1-46a8-b0d8-32e2a200b8e8","dc9b6179-78d1-4eec-9df7-47aadc6c4002","dd99547d-81d1-4764-ba78-52a1cddf906d","ddada193-97b9-4ccc-8a51-bfbea77a0c06","e27aa94c-fa47-4a58-bc17-1e5d3387b739","e446ef0a-2a74-42bf-bcd6-2b793506650e","e6d36e44-00e2-4f9e-95b1-e892e44117eb","e70df749-9305-44b3-8a30-defc332a7fa4","e9029bad-f0af-4178-8545-61b8bf20d98f","ea0bba2c-7a56-40f2-afac-00f638b54fc3","ea51c75b-4b85-48fb-bbb7-8fde23c110aa","eb7f5240-b11f-4c58-9681-91c05d2c3f50","ed2c35d4-102a-4b73-8382-2ac35610faed","efb7c5ac-4ac5-4964-80cb-f95ebaa0e04c","f24f8cd0-0ca1-49cf-8cf1-4a5e6b938fe3","f319102d-533a-41ff-9f08-6bda6778bb7e","f6e3366d-13bc-4a60-94b6-f77a2c2032c0","f75dd4aa-d0bc-4078-857d-76a41f9df08f","fc91133d-e4b6-4458-8d6c-cb1af7bcd97e","oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-1852e8a212bd5903","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-63426d939d718e7f","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-86a403aef71f924e","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-ce4031737a7654b3","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["production"]}]},{"id":"supply_chain_stages:group:midstream-supply-chain","name":"Midstream supply chain","definition":"Processing, packaging, and storage stages.","occurrences":154,"article_count":145,"event_count":145,"article_ids":["008cc0e4-d7d7-475f-80d8-d81621e7b862","03ea9124-befd-4983-bcdc-147e3ed3bf73","0932679a-fe82-4a1e-949e-9d4fd17ed2a0","0a342064-5378-4aff-b4aa-34ae5c1ab66b","0af3703f-23ec-4f8f-a1b6-45b4adb68b12","0ef4d3e4-844c-47ee-a430-8f171ec4c000","0facca96-d90c-4f21-ba98-356f7f6b1622","102a4953-33a2-4842-827e-987e3bb6ce7a","141518ef-ce68-4969-bb2a-66f56733fab2","18f4411e-1d84-42c5-835a-97436ad30c7c","1933f8f5-8812-4e24-85bd-cdbdc83f929e","1a806023-ac1d-4da2-924e-25821c2554f5","1a87f314-ec7e-4407-96f2-0995e8d26fc0","1c7ea343-020a-4266-9854-b12ebfa2cf50","1c8fe57c-2cee-4f73-a5f3-6ee4051024e7","1df33743-1016-49ce-981b-862125c0893f","1e6b9f5b-a065-4242-ae58-1f105455955f","1fe9639d-5c39-472e-94a7-73ac2b03bfce","23ff1efe-782a-4174-8f33-41a3ff0e8c44","26ac5726-fd69-42b8-a80e-6a71b91ba466","28a03096-e60c-4adb-b4fa-55f0bd28a95d","292b562c-132b-47cc-9030-d2544e801e7e","29a173b3-4587-4257-9c93-2f0c483079c5","2f23ec7d-e712-46f5-ae1c-5e7634725242","3282adec-c328-4317-a091-a126587d78de","32bc8e29-1313-4d9b-86ff-8c3bb665f057","34dc1c1f-d12c-4230-bb1c-e41b6961f288","3624ed70-d464-4caa-9b4e-4dfc2ed435dc","36a70fc6-de5a-494c-9dc5-801fe7a7a53d","3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","3911de79-cbfd-4eaa-9311-207b452faa93","3e325b99-7611-4f89-8963-7f79c5ac4105","43de8661-2844-46b7-bb39-15eb17f6b82e","445ff19b-5429-4a55-be3f-c4b03481b04f","4726ed7e-d61a-4a2c-9e05-59cbaa4f1bf0","47635cd8-696c-4adf-94ed-338f084a3d62","4974f73f-37bc-4300-8d31-d97ca337365b","4a021f95-539e-4217-98a0-d651be9a3b47","4c67d899-fab5-4e78-9274-526d6a4fe0bb","4d6ab7d0-4e16-4d1b-aa49-7f453c9352b6","502ff9a1-ac00-4ef2-96cb-0a0614085766","504dd102-6089-4fcb-a066-0006720862a7","508d009a-650f-4e40-b03d-ebef9d2c069e","5245dc0a-5d68-4a00-ad89-6255f3bee930","526515f5-4a82-4b0b-9e1c-7f3a2aa4cde4","534ab39c-32c3-46ea-a742-5095170a0003","53f8ec9a-900f-481f-bfb5-a6ca452416ed","5406e730-2d78-47b4-ba27-fc933e691eab","54637d34-f16e-4e98-84c1-681a0fca559c","550bda80-b5be-488a-89f6-64b9698b4033","5fa4530c-d60b-48c1-b6b2-371abff6d77a","60ccacb1-7c41-4259-b651-bfbf60e7b53a","6135126e-45b3-4fe7-a80f-82248b08ea7b","6ab671c9-310c-4d88-bd88-0251180b2345","6f4adcf4-c63b-41c9-b7f6-0b0f4e75c857","70b9c7ef-3983-40dd-b904-5607537ff37f","73066633-67a8-4240-8c5a-3c4ae29b486d","747400a0-bfad-4fa2-8004-06f237d1c543","7ddc7283-670a-4dfb-9e38-a11aa0c579c2","81b21166-1d16-4aec-910f-b382f9680f5f","81f9e1b1-71fd-45a2-9292-017420336059","84a895b3-81ad-42e9-b54d-614c66aca856","84ea460e-bfc2-4977-aebb-32594a90693b","8577ca11-d1ef-4517-846f-747a51b46f07","867c2a12-155a-4309-aff0-300c6125824c","892c7a97-bb6b-47a5-9402-8a5293acf25b","8ecfae6d-fb77-4dfe-9f9b-f1425d8a13da","920f5e05-04f9-4545-b26d-ea48a1f18a2f","95044e07-ad37-43f6-95b0-cebe1e9f8ce0","97c9d44f-1ca4-489d-a786-dc23f1fe1175","9cbf8104-4fa2-4365-bc32-09eb2d1c9381","9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","a18ba308-f8ab-4590-b466-daf80aa2b59c","a6385d09-ca9d-4f95-b5ba-4f50630bec35","a7cc57e8-71f7-4536-ba7c-452e09344a18","a9c15856-f188-45d4-80a8-7929118af59a","ac5e071a-48a2-4a53-a1f6-5fc7b6d35280","add15855-56e0-4264-819c-b8e8110846aa","adfa4015-b34e-4488-99e4-b20b4dc10324","aec84261-126b-4386-b0f4-15f160ca67ae","b293dea5-f7e1-4889-a56d-f823569cdff4","b3b632d3-bab8-43e4-9749-51b79e59f7dd","b3e58970-8bf0-4e37-a8f9-dd4fce60bf46","b4b614f7-a43d-4e57-9766-25f7fef90d68","b556af30-b2db-4273-8b3b-a5b1ec113ebb","b55fc156-b5e6-49b6-b4f1-e092d3b4f553","bcd80071-6449-4036-accf-62939d2bc771","bf5cf44c-c3df-4c9c-b13b-8a0108b8a106","c349f006-e1f4-498e-970a-626a724e2231","c3aa82e4-0707-4514-a535-22d6d4a7f0b2","c7589046-9f75-46b4-bd78-c3fe0703df52","cb333cad-a0a7-4971-8f06-e4ca49e58c39","cf1f664f-fab8-46ef-9768-c3fc897d3913","cf35dad3-c846-4c5e-91db-577efd256f78","cfd3be60-c380-4a63-8e12-5fd8af9b72bd","d2c92cf6-2a73-4e89-adff-db3cb523f8e1","d2f303e3-c25c-412f-8ae4-4ec525f68736","d315d00d-a3eb-4c0f-9554-c1395585910f","d405b9b8-3fd3-4230-a3d3-ccdd34abd185","d6f9dd1e-cee9-48ff-a7e7-71d7a7b8f61d","d8ab6193-0742-4b7e-99ea-f1131b5fc36f","d9794536-257f-4a12-8d46-a7c0c649fb97","db8eb9e3-f6e6-4be4-b6d2-d135a6c3e9ac","dc0f107c-d6af-40f2-b8fd-d6a8264071a5","e1955bc5-123d-4ca0-b875-2d75b1f718f1","e2f38cc3-06ff-4db2-8aad-a537c1e1d0c8","e57d61a5-e3ec-423d-ad96-243fbfae502b","e6e7e00b-0ede-4741-8419-066a93e431cd","e7a8eb39-66a7-4777-a0d6-cfb00f8f0798","ea27969f-7a0b-4e5c-9893-7763d5fdbfbf","ea6c8861-7a39-4e19-8e71-58720131fa8d","f19a484a-77bd-4389-8266-523228328091","f289c668-0c40-41e6-82af-ae6829b262d4","f5c77efa-f72b-424c-a810-81cd552ba3de","fb4d21e7-be93-4775-905f-977427db28c4","fdc662ec-5ed7-4d04-8993-6144ff01abc2","fec4e8d2-6a2f-4046-b9d4-85a831f76655","oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-1c3f4e35a1252449","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-438415c185832786","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-66b89ef48f4536a9","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-94951aba738c80b3","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-a9685f88d15906f6","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-e1cd585e16b9635b","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae"],"entries":[{"id":"supply_chain_stages:entry:midstream-supply-chain:processing","name":"Processing","definition":"A normalized supply-chain stages concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":105,"article_count":105,"event_count":105,"article_ids":["008cc0e4-d7d7-475f-80d8-d81621e7b862","03ea9124-befd-4983-bcdc-147e3ed3bf73","0932679a-fe82-4a1e-949e-9d4fd17ed2a0","0a342064-5378-4aff-b4aa-34ae5c1ab66b","0af3703f-23ec-4f8f-a1b6-45b4adb68b12","0ef4d3e4-844c-47ee-a430-8f171ec4c000","102a4953-33a2-4842-827e-987e3bb6ce7a","141518ef-ce68-4969-bb2a-66f56733fab2","18f4411e-1d84-42c5-835a-97436ad30c7c","1933f8f5-8812-4e24-85bd-cdbdc83f929e","1a806023-ac1d-4da2-924e-25821c2554f5","1a87f314-ec7e-4407-96f2-0995e8d26fc0","1c7ea343-020a-4266-9854-b12ebfa2cf50","1e6b9f5b-a065-4242-ae58-1f105455955f","1fe9639d-5c39-472e-94a7-73ac2b03bfce","23ff1efe-782a-4174-8f33-41a3ff0e8c44","26ac5726-fd69-42b8-a80e-6a71b91ba466","28a03096-e60c-4adb-b4fa-55f0bd28a95d","29a173b3-4587-4257-9c93-2f0c483079c5","2f23ec7d-e712-46f5-ae1c-5e7634725242","3282adec-c328-4317-a091-a126587d78de","32bc8e29-1313-4d9b-86ff-8c3bb665f057","34dc1c1f-d12c-4230-bb1c-e41b6961f288","3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","3911de79-cbfd-4eaa-9311-207b452faa93","445ff19b-5429-4a55-be3f-c4b03481b04f","47635cd8-696c-4adf-94ed-338f084a3d62","4974f73f-37bc-4300-8d31-d97ca337365b","4a021f95-539e-4217-98a0-d651be9a3b47","4c67d899-fab5-4e78-9274-526d6a4fe0bb","4d6ab7d0-4e16-4d1b-aa49-7f453c9352b6","504dd102-6089-4fcb-a066-0006720862a7","5245dc0a-5d68-4a00-ad89-6255f3bee930","526515f5-4a82-4b0b-9e1c-7f3a2aa4cde4","534ab39c-32c3-46ea-a742-5095170a0003","53f8ec9a-900f-481f-bfb5-a6ca452416ed","5406e730-2d78-47b4-ba27-fc933e691eab","54637d34-f16e-4e98-84c1-681a0fca559c","550bda80-b5be-488a-89f6-64b9698b4033","5fa4530c-d60b-48c1-b6b2-371abff6d77a","60ccacb1-7c41-4259-b651-bfbf60e7b53a","6135126e-45b3-4fe7-a80f-82248b08ea7b","6ab671c9-310c-4d88-bd88-0251180b2345","6f4adcf4-c63b-41c9-b7f6-0b0f4e75c857","70b9c7ef-3983-40dd-b904-5607537ff37f","73066633-67a8-4240-8c5a-3c4ae29b486d","747400a0-bfad-4fa2-8004-06f237d1c543","7ddc7283-670a-4dfb-9e38-a11aa0c579c2","81b21166-1d16-4aec-910f-b382f9680f5f","81f9e1b1-71fd-45a2-9292-017420336059","84ea460e-bfc2-4977-aebb-32594a90693b","8577ca11-d1ef-4517-846f-747a51b46f07","867c2a12-155a-4309-aff0-300c6125824c","892c7a97-bb6b-47a5-9402-8a5293acf25b","8ecfae6d-fb77-4dfe-9f9b-f1425d8a13da","920f5e05-04f9-4545-b26d-ea48a1f18a2f","97c9d44f-1ca4-489d-a786-dc23f1fe1175","9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","a7cc57e8-71f7-4536-ba7c-452e09344a18","a9c15856-f188-45d4-80a8-7929118af59a","ac5e071a-48a2-4a53-a1f6-5fc7b6d35280","add15855-56e0-4264-819c-b8e8110846aa","adfa4015-b34e-4488-99e4-b20b4dc10324","aec84261-126b-4386-b0f4-15f160ca67ae","b293dea5-f7e1-4889-a56d-f823569cdff4","b4b614f7-a43d-4e57-9766-25f7fef90d68","b556af30-b2db-4273-8b3b-a5b1ec113ebb","bcd80071-6449-4036-accf-62939d2bc771","c349f006-e1f4-498e-970a-626a724e2231","c3aa82e4-0707-4514-a535-22d6d4a7f0b2","c7589046-9f75-46b4-bd78-c3fe0703df52","cb333cad-a0a7-4971-8f06-e4ca49e58c39","cf1f664f-fab8-46ef-9768-c3fc897d3913","cf35dad3-c846-4c5e-91db-577efd256f78","d2c92cf6-2a73-4e89-adff-db3cb523f8e1","d315d00d-a3eb-4c0f-9554-c1395585910f","d405b9b8-3fd3-4230-a3d3-ccdd34abd185","d6f9dd1e-cee9-48ff-a7e7-71d7a7b8f61d","d8ab6193-0742-4b7e-99ea-f1131b5fc36f","d9794536-257f-4a12-8d46-a7c0c649fb97","db8eb9e3-f6e6-4be4-b6d2-d135a6c3e9ac","dc0f107c-d6af-40f2-b8fd-d6a8264071a5","e1955bc5-123d-4ca0-b875-2d75b1f718f1","e2f38cc3-06ff-4db2-8aad-a537c1e1d0c8","e57d61a5-e3ec-423d-ad96-243fbfae502b","e6e7e00b-0ede-4741-8419-066a93e431cd","e7a8eb39-66a7-4777-a0d6-cfb00f8f0798","ea27969f-7a0b-4e5c-9893-7763d5fdbfbf","f19a484a-77bd-4389-8266-523228328091","f289c668-0c40-41e6-82af-ae6829b262d4","f5c77efa-f72b-424c-a810-81cd552ba3de","fb4d21e7-be93-4775-905f-977427db28c4","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-a9685f88d15906f6","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["processing"]},{"id":"supply_chain_stages:entry:midstream-supply-chain:storage","name":"Storage","definition":"A normalized supply-chain stages concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":35,"article_count":35,"event_count":35,"article_ids":["0facca96-d90c-4f21-ba98-356f7f6b1622","1c8fe57c-2cee-4f73-a5f3-6ee4051024e7","292b562c-132b-47cc-9030-d2544e801e7e","3624ed70-d464-4caa-9b4e-4dfc2ed435dc","36a70fc6-de5a-494c-9dc5-801fe7a7a53d","3e325b99-7611-4f89-8963-7f79c5ac4105","43de8661-2844-46b7-bb39-15eb17f6b82e","4726ed7e-d61a-4a2c-9e05-59cbaa4f1bf0","4a021f95-539e-4217-98a0-d651be9a3b47","502ff9a1-ac00-4ef2-96cb-0a0614085766","508d009a-650f-4e40-b03d-ebef9d2c069e","84a895b3-81ad-42e9-b54d-614c66aca856","95044e07-ad37-43f6-95b0-cebe1e9f8ce0","9cbf8104-4fa2-4365-bc32-09eb2d1c9381","9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","a18ba308-f8ab-4590-b466-daf80aa2b59c","a6385d09-ca9d-4f95-b5ba-4f50630bec35","b3e58970-8bf0-4e37-a8f9-dd4fce60bf46","b55fc156-b5e6-49b6-b4f1-e092d3b4f553","bf5cf44c-c3df-4c9c-b13b-8a0108b8a106","cf1f664f-fab8-46ef-9768-c3fc897d3913","cfd3be60-c380-4a63-8e12-5fd8af9b72bd","d2f303e3-c25c-412f-8ae4-4ec525f68736","ea6c8861-7a39-4e19-8e71-58720131fa8d","fdc662ec-5ed7-4d04-8993-6144ff01abc2","fec4e8d2-6a2f-4046-b9d4-85a831f76655","oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-1c3f4e35a1252449","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-94951aba738c80b3","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["storage"]},{"id":"supply_chain_stages:entry:midstream-supply-chain:packaging","name":"Packaging","definition":"A normalized supply-chain stages concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":14,"article_count":14,"event_count":14,"article_ids":["1df33743-1016-49ce-981b-862125c0893f","36a70fc6-de5a-494c-9dc5-801fe7a7a53d","4726ed7e-d61a-4a2c-9e05-59cbaa4f1bf0","7ddc7283-670a-4dfb-9e38-a11aa0c579c2","b3b632d3-bab8-43e4-9749-51b79e59f7dd","fdc662ec-5ed7-4d04-8993-6144ff01abc2","oil-438415c185832786","oil-66b89ef48f4536a9","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-e1cd585e16b9635b","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["packaging"]}]},{"id":"supply_chain_stages:group:downstream-supply-chain","name":"Downstream supply chain","definition":"Retail and point-of-sale stages.","occurrences":145,"article_count":140,"event_count":145,"article_ids":["05375704-5b45-4e0a-b388-9944c0c5fc9f","0a23e582-3dac-4091-bf36-a08d511a3763","0aa842b8-1ac9-4243-a8b6-5d98d32d6089","0d96e6b1-57f6-4555-8711-703a6c818eea","0ea7c6a7-d2c1-498f-aa00-f3fc942206ed","10f36230-190b-4b13-8cfc-8d12c2f37080","164f43df-a069-4197-9854-e7bd9fc78fae","194f3e22-f4b6-483b-9333-762c3a3b6b9d","22261df7-8974-447f-a1cf-192c59528f64","255ac21d-c17e-4926-9dad-13db7698ed72","2719a94d-d523-4fef-bfd9-a1bef16dd951","2ad1f047-985c-4c59-aa13-749fa75bcba9","2b442757-da6a-46e5-ae37-b083e00062d3","2fc5c9f1-64d2-498f-8f7a-96d94b926f6d","2fe1bef6-e797-4d9f-bb5b-6f936d7a55dc","301bb818-ff44-4346-9ffe-ad58bf13cfb2","31cae76c-aa62-4328-bd40-368275f60e9f","3278338f-1fa0-4045-9701-e237d5ad0930","3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","3c0e9d23-f858-47eb-8e7a-23db1d42822a","3d6b98eb-c79e-460c-883b-9c997ffea009","43e20f96-27cb-4f67-b7e5-6228aea8e7b6","45fdd40d-5bc4-4fe7-9eb9-883c55f14a70","46441742-607f-484f-80fe-b1334048144a","4a638904-2bcf-4037-8afd-ec6e5b0b6b11","502ff9a1-ac00-4ef2-96cb-0a0614085766","57b2326c-e877-4995-82fc-221eda139718","58679f65-396b-4b1f-b725-9907ebc9f038","634a0a0f-0899-427f-9396-6cc3c5442643","66bb816a-1961-4e45-8460-9328304c7956","672ecfdb-cb9d-485d-8fc1-76e6a8269fe7","6f00035b-1437-428d-895c-a234866e29e0","706f0136-7ae5-45f2-b804-e3a8c9a14d1c","7a539249-77a2-4e2b-a29f-6952304d80d7","816a43e1-6b33-4a27-a385-9d12dd8e924f","835cbabf-d424-4f04-89cb-1d8c0b08f1ab","905b10d3-5531-40bc-b5e3-84beb79f1af2","946d9238-09b9-474e-8481-5e734cedca7a","95b8351c-9ddb-457d-9035-ad3b6d181dc7","97c9d44f-1ca4-489d-a786-dc23f1fe1175","9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","a96905fe-9d68-4a0c-9c4e-ce250411fcd9","aa57f0d8-8cb4-4c4c-8ef4-4c4acdef25e4","b5940660-7f58-4123-bb25-6f78d4e1694d","c7803b74-2f5d-47d0-a09e-c27ed98ec1a3","c8ddee14-df38-49aa-9d85-a7c6b34273a6","c999d71f-777d-4d80-9f37-37391f97acd4","cfa001c3-f0fc-45cd-8a71-3e35d2026e1f","d3c6617c-2925-40b2-aa72-9b0b6c5e83d4","d7f7d93d-fda2-48cd-89a3-7b5c35ec6480","df6dd614-6785-4c3a-b6c7-1e091a751c64","e1bbca7c-14db-40cf-a128-0219f12466a3","e6f33250-4650-42ce-96e8-87ce7eebc853","ea51c75b-4b85-48fb-bbb7-8fde23c110aa","eb84cbb3-24d1-4565-9ec1-8bd3b9d4bec9","edf6b48c-90dc-4757-814e-999556997808","f1307eae-cbfb-4f04-b6cc-3facd9e296d6","f1f602c9-64cd-4bfc-855c-fb8060a9c483","f25f2d19-18b4-4e7e-ad7b-8f30a193b3d6","f5653eaf-7d13-4c91-93c7-e30daca2ec3a","faaca14c-514a-4f25-897a-cd9bbc31d5d0","oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-055a850c7fce9512","oil-05aa031a4b58524e","oil-06d5928124689ba0","oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-081117bbf714a215","oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0","oil-0d7b13a282f9b466","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","oil-156fd0980ec51fe6","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-23d97461886d2622","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-42c4efcdce45e35d","oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-4b88eb2520f8cc22","oil-4bd4c6831e9c7077","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-5413f17944743156","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-63f43befc46e25fa","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-7ced813eb9eb1314","oil-7ed3f9582cae741d","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-846611108e27fafb","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-8e1ede70f7533502","oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-9c21da748413e6f9","oil-9f582ea75e0eddfb","oil-a0831d014f72baf3","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","oil-a882a3e8b7aeb487","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-b434a85e1e9196d0","oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-bd1df718191f8f6e","oil-c1a2f95596a3b00d","oil-c2fa50179af284f7","oil-c72d68cafd2478be","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-c94e003c369b3450","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","oil-d479413f1e610f85","oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba","oil-e1cd585e16b9635b","oil-e72f16ac2686175c","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f1693a0670f7b784","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-fba2e5ff157abb74","oil-fc714f38909e4348","oil-fcda56b4bb45ffd3","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9","oil-ff34df409a4806f1"],"entries":[{"id":"supply_chain_stages:entry:downstream-supply-chain:retail","name":"Retail","definition":"A normalized supply-chain stages concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":145,"article_count":140,"event_count":145,"article_ids":["05375704-5b45-4e0a-b388-9944c0c5fc9f","0a23e582-3dac-4091-bf36-a08d511a3763","0aa842b8-1ac9-4243-a8b6-5d98d32d6089","0d96e6b1-57f6-4555-8711-703a6c818eea","0ea7c6a7-d2c1-498f-aa00-f3fc942206ed","10f36230-190b-4b13-8cfc-8d12c2f37080","164f43df-a069-4197-9854-e7bd9fc78fae","194f3e22-f4b6-483b-9333-762c3a3b6b9d","22261df7-8974-447f-a1cf-192c59528f64","255ac21d-c17e-4926-9dad-13db7698ed72","2719a94d-d523-4fef-bfd9-a1bef16dd951","2ad1f047-985c-4c59-aa13-749fa75bcba9","2b442757-da6a-46e5-ae37-b083e00062d3","2fc5c9f1-64d2-498f-8f7a-96d94b926f6d","2fe1bef6-e797-4d9f-bb5b-6f936d7a55dc","301bb818-ff44-4346-9ffe-ad58bf13cfb2","31cae76c-aa62-4328-bd40-368275f60e9f","3278338f-1fa0-4045-9701-e237d5ad0930","3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","3c0e9d23-f858-47eb-8e7a-23db1d42822a","3d6b98eb-c79e-460c-883b-9c997ffea009","43e20f96-27cb-4f67-b7e5-6228aea8e7b6","45fdd40d-5bc4-4fe7-9eb9-883c55f14a70","46441742-607f-484f-80fe-b1334048144a","4a638904-2bcf-4037-8afd-ec6e5b0b6b11","502ff9a1-ac00-4ef2-96cb-0a0614085766","57b2326c-e877-4995-82fc-221eda139718","58679f65-396b-4b1f-b725-9907ebc9f038","634a0a0f-0899-427f-9396-6cc3c5442643","66bb816a-1961-4e45-8460-9328304c7956","672ecfdb-cb9d-485d-8fc1-76e6a8269fe7","6f00035b-1437-428d-895c-a234866e29e0","706f0136-7ae5-45f2-b804-e3a8c9a14d1c","7a539249-77a2-4e2b-a29f-6952304d80d7","816a43e1-6b33-4a27-a385-9d12dd8e924f","835cbabf-d424-4f04-89cb-1d8c0b08f1ab","905b10d3-5531-40bc-b5e3-84beb79f1af2","946d9238-09b9-474e-8481-5e734cedca7a","95b8351c-9ddb-457d-9035-ad3b6d181dc7","97c9d44f-1ca4-489d-a786-dc23f1fe1175","9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","a96905fe-9d68-4a0c-9c4e-ce250411fcd9","aa57f0d8-8cb4-4c4c-8ef4-4c4acdef25e4","b5940660-7f58-4123-bb25-6f78d4e1694d","c7803b74-2f5d-47d0-a09e-c27ed98ec1a3","c8ddee14-df38-49aa-9d85-a7c6b34273a6","c999d71f-777d-4d80-9f37-37391f97acd4","cfa001c3-f0fc-45cd-8a71-3e35d2026e1f","d3c6617c-2925-40b2-aa72-9b0b6c5e83d4","d7f7d93d-fda2-48cd-89a3-7b5c35ec6480","df6dd614-6785-4c3a-b6c7-1e091a751c64","e1bbca7c-14db-40cf-a128-0219f12466a3","e6f33250-4650-42ce-96e8-87ce7eebc853","ea51c75b-4b85-48fb-bbb7-8fde23c110aa","eb84cbb3-24d1-4565-9ec1-8bd3b9d4bec9","edf6b48c-90dc-4757-814e-999556997808","f1307eae-cbfb-4f04-b6cc-3facd9e296d6","f1f602c9-64cd-4bfc-855c-fb8060a9c483","f25f2d19-18b4-4e7e-ad7b-8f30a193b3d6","f5653eaf-7d13-4c91-93c7-e30daca2ec3a","faaca14c-514a-4f25-897a-cd9bbc31d5d0","oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-055a850c7fce9512","oil-05aa031a4b58524e","oil-06d5928124689ba0","oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-081117bbf714a215","oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0","oil-0d7b13a282f9b466","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","oil-156fd0980ec51fe6","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-23d97461886d2622","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-42c4efcdce45e35d","oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-4b88eb2520f8cc22","oil-4bd4c6831e9c7077","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-5413f17944743156","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-63f43befc46e25fa","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-7ced813eb9eb1314","oil-7ed3f9582cae741d","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-846611108e27fafb","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-8e1ede70f7533502","oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-9c21da748413e6f9","oil-9f582ea75e0eddfb","oil-a0831d014f72baf3","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","oil-a882a3e8b7aeb487","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-b434a85e1e9196d0","oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-bd1df718191f8f6e","oil-c1a2f95596a3b00d","oil-c2fa50179af284f7","oil-c72d68cafd2478be","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-c94e003c369b3450","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","oil-d479413f1e610f85","oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba","oil-e1cd585e16b9635b","oil-e72f16ac2686175c","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f1693a0670f7b784","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-fba2e5ff157abb74","oil-fc714f38909e4348","oil-fcda56b4bb45ffd3","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9","oil-ff34df409a4806f1"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["retail"]}]}]},{"id":"detection_methods","label":"Detection methods","description":"Methods reported as identifying or investigating the issue.","groups":[{"id":"detection_methods:group:regulatory-field-detection","name":"Regulatory field detection","definition":"Inspection, raid, search, or enforcement activity used to identify a possible issue.","occurrences":359,"article_count":343,"event_count":348,"article_ids":["008cc0e4-d7d7-475f-80d8-d81621e7b862","0109eea0-3adc-4177-a6f7-e3bc31bf237d","03ea9124-befd-4983-bcdc-147e3ed3bf73","04c00967-a247-4802-b3c2-3f266885c385","05375704-5b45-4e0a-b388-9944c0c5fc9f","0932679a-fe82-4a1e-949e-9d4fd17ed2a0","0a23e582-3dac-4091-bf36-a08d511a3763","0a342064-5378-4aff-b4aa-34ae5c1ab66b","0aa842b8-1ac9-4243-a8b6-5d98d32d6089","0af3703f-23ec-4f8f-a1b6-45b4adb68b12","0d14295d-a954-4163-8974-ecb51bd464e8","0d96e6b1-57f6-4555-8711-703a6c818eea","0e518ac8-dc53-4c79-938a-bd26c1142eeb","0facca96-d90c-4f21-ba98-356f7f6b1622","102a4953-33a2-4842-827e-987e3bb6ce7a","10f36230-190b-4b13-8cfc-8d12c2f37080","141518ef-ce68-4969-bb2a-66f56733fab2","18f4411e-1d84-42c5-835a-97436ad30c7c","1931e9b4-edf1-42ec-a9c4-00ff0cbcff9a","1933f8f5-8812-4e24-85bd-cdbdc83f929e","1addfba0-b7e9-4722-85be-a642cdf63571","1b1069d2-3f50-4dd3-a8bd-0aeed6bacf98","1c8fe57c-2cee-4f73-a5f3-6ee4051024e7","1de4a13b-1497-421e-b5bc-a8ebbc7a3b18","1df33743-1016-49ce-981b-862125c0893f","1fe9639d-5c39-472e-94a7-73ac2b03bfce","2010c6e2-c9cb-4a3e-b22b-8cabf1044074","2013c452-d1c8-41a0-abea-92e26d231790","21fb2b00-9b86-4924-9a0d-248f976cfd93","22261df7-8974-447f-a1cf-192c59528f64","2255e304-d6ef-4707-b594-cbc3955019ec","229a7f40-f956-476e-8c84-3fd9ed3d6c29","22bf4101-c33b-4711-b6e3-379968f7c217","23a5dd2a-a53c-44b8-8b86-37e04d4cf1ee","2499d49c-748f-41d8-84d9-eed7a66ad43a","255ac21d-c17e-4926-9dad-13db7698ed72","2719a94d-d523-4fef-bfd9-a1bef16dd951","28a03096-e60c-4adb-b4fa-55f0bd28a95d","29a173b3-4587-4257-9c93-2f0c483079c5","2a59f77c-89ba-49fe-be6c-b3c9756a9940","2b442757-da6a-46e5-ae37-b083e00062d3","2f23ec7d-e712-46f5-ae1c-5e7634725242","2fc5c9f1-64d2-498f-8f7a-96d94b926f6d","2fede3c0-46a7-46e8-a776-5a6fd6d3f08e","301bb818-ff44-4346-9ffe-ad58bf13cfb2","31cae76c-aa62-4328-bd40-368275f60e9f","3278338f-1fa0-4045-9701-e237d5ad0930","3282adec-c328-4317-a091-a126587d78de","32bc8e29-1313-4d9b-86ff-8c3bb665f057","34dc1c1f-d12c-4230-bb1c-e41b6961f288","36a70fc6-de5a-494c-9dc5-801fe7a7a53d","3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","3865528e-cbb8-4615-af7d-f9ab01e9fe4d","3911de79-cbfd-4eaa-9311-207b452faa93","39e61860-2a60-448c-838e-a7f01e4d0c5c","3cdd0ffb-841b-4883-9b1a-df7b28022554","3d6b98eb-c79e-460c-883b-9c997ffea009","3e2829b3-2380-49cb-a370-77a313e8eaa1","3e325b99-7611-4f89-8963-7f79c5ac4105","4216dab3-b436-422a-a6ee-74b5858f7aa2","438c4f31-19bd-4ff3-bed4-035569ec6cbf","43de8661-2844-46b7-bb39-15eb17f6b82e","43e20f96-27cb-4f67-b7e5-6228aea8e7b6","451d9824-7933-403d-beaa-1ac6398509c9","471bc3da-bbd4-417c-875a-595a713be7fd","4726ed7e-d61a-4a2c-9e05-59cbaa4f1bf0","473ed916-1979-4222-b1e8-38d39c51fe03","47635cd8-696c-4adf-94ed-338f084a3d62","4974f73f-37bc-4300-8d31-d97ca337365b","4c67d899-fab5-4e78-9274-526d6a4fe0bb","4cd73621-691c-4866-91c1-0b99d0d1a89a","4d6ab7d0-4e16-4d1b-aa49-7f453c9352b6","4d7063c6-5201-4ce1-89ed-75ee21d51b98","4fa075c9-a30f-47e5-8f09-158017bfd6d6","502ff9a1-ac00-4ef2-96cb-0a0614085766","504dd102-6089-4fcb-a066-0006720862a7","508d009a-650f-4e40-b03d-ebef9d2c069e","526515f5-4a82-4b0b-9e1c-7f3a2aa4cde4","52bd3a8a-1c92-484d-8be6-5f7e4a7274e1","534ab39c-32c3-46ea-a742-5095170a0003","53f8ec9a-900f-481f-bfb5-a6ca452416ed","5406e730-2d78-47b4-ba27-fc933e691eab","54637d34-f16e-4e98-84c1-681a0fca559c","54686005-b842-4cc5-82b1-0276e36a42b6","5710a503-9fbe-46ae-abd5-2663069b70db","57b2326c-e877-4995-82fc-221eda139718","58163259-bc87-4025-a6cc-f3a0848b52cf","58679f65-396b-4b1f-b725-9907ebc9f038","58ac029e-4204-42c4-8ff3-6dbd84dd382a","5a7bde0b-59e0-4f86-9b63-2bbebb593d41","5c86116b-5fae-45a9-b467-01fc8b26a166","5d222c9b-8733-4d3b-abaa-59f77da35546","5fa4530c-d60b-48c1-b6b2-371abff6d77a","60ccacb1-7c41-4259-b651-bfbf60e7b53a","6135126e-45b3-4fe7-a80f-82248b08ea7b","61a00782-20f7-4170-b4e2-d9d9157b3a3c","62bc0e3c-1d90-4688-bc1b-e00f620c5c8c","634a0a0f-0899-427f-9396-6cc3c5442643","6411a3a1-2932-41eb-b497-f9a2400de74c","66bb816a-1961-4e45-8460-9328304c7956","672ecfdb-cb9d-485d-8fc1-76e6a8269fe7","68753b50-8fe7-4499-bb2d-ddfcc7e16c94","6ab671c9-310c-4d88-bd88-0251180b2345","6ee56cf3-78f2-4420-bede-08f76397b2fb","6f00035b-1437-428d-895c-a234866e29e0","6f4adcf4-c63b-41c9-b7f6-0b0f4e75c857","706246bb-b5c8-4d73-81fa-2e93d040c762","706f0136-7ae5-45f2-b804-e3a8c9a14d1c","70b9c7ef-3983-40dd-b904-5607537ff37f","73369c4a-c44b-4b7a-b3cc-07766ccb4e2a","73e97a89-5b5f-4104-bc6a-50b8f564040a","7855cb39-b177-4d3b-bd72-0a18afd5415b","79f059b8-00b2-4345-ad46-440c7bc371df","7a539249-77a2-4e2b-a29f-6952304d80d7","7a707681-5edc-461c-b5a8-0057a374f3cc","7ddc7283-670a-4dfb-9e38-a11aa0c579c2","8151434e-f600-47a9-93df-16b483e88961","816a43e1-6b33-4a27-a385-9d12dd8e924f","8187d86e-f46c-4e26-8188-a4e7b31de2f6","81b21166-1d16-4aec-910f-b382f9680f5f","8205ac1a-be22-438c-b3e0-f7aa463d3501","824601ea-5309-4ddf-bc61-486c992e309c","83bf777b-6ee5-4e82-bd85-6e374853473a","84512e93-e51a-4c89-88dd-ecc2afc0699a","84a895b3-81ad-42e9-b54d-614c66aca856","84ea460e-bfc2-4977-aebb-32594a90693b","85680853-3899-4f21-b262-dbe3e8893779","8577ca11-d1ef-4517-846f-747a51b46f07","867c2a12-155a-4309-aff0-300c6125824c","86b559ac-3645-468b-9f43-7d961bd255d7","8779026e-22f2-4276-a7b9-695e4e569057","892c7a97-bb6b-47a5-9402-8a5293acf25b","89e1831f-7c8d-46ad-b545-7b0e141b1fa7","8aaa4093-987c-4a1d-8fbd-8e1d1e495fe3","8e4f2f4a-8039-4ba0-9b6d-beecad106136","8ecfae6d-fb77-4dfe-9f9b-f1425d8a13da","8ef8782e-cc91-4ddc-95d5-d260f1b7a518","9368fe71-a18d-4580-8063-8e3f17e6cec9","9379cea2-647c-459b-af54-770e31e9bbe1","93c87fee-61ec-4ea8-bd4f-3434669835ee","946d9238-09b9-474e-8481-5e734cedca7a","94d114b9-3c47-468e-8714-ed449f90e8e4","94faca18-b471-4748-8bab-f399641cedbd","96621df7-0c9b-41e5-a5a6-3f21a24613d5","96adc5c1-5a68-473e-9d38-85bed792c8fc","97c9d44f-1ca4-489d-a786-dc23f1fe1175","9c74f902-2ef0-4269-b436-acc19aa11ea5","9c81b00b-87e1-4cce-bfc8-9583b3b8a234","9cbf8104-4fa2-4365-bc32-09eb2d1c9381","9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","9f454843-a34c-4619-a576-493f835993b4","9fe3b91d-3719-4260-926a-d5711bd1efc4","a06cd968-9dc5-42c5-a6e8-3d3c36dfc8c2","a18ba308-f8ab-4590-b466-daf80aa2b59c","a3aeeb23-ea47-454e-9079-05e2142e157d","a45c3495-d077-4241-b1d7-72fa109d0e6b","a6385d09-ca9d-4f95-b5ba-4f50630bec35","a7002128-c4bc-48cd-bed1-46a529e69132","a96905fe-9d68-4a0c-9c4e-ce250411fcd9","a9c15856-f188-45d4-80a8-7929118af59a","aa57f0d8-8cb4-4c4c-8ef4-4c4acdef25e4","ab7d0ab2-d774-415c-bd3f-a606f92ef3c3","ac5e071a-48a2-4a53-a1f6-5fc7b6d35280","adad636e-6844-49cb-bb07-54ff4f1a044f","add15855-56e0-4264-819c-b8e8110846aa","aec84261-126b-4386-b0f4-15f160ca67ae","b26721cc-ba4b-460e-a726-17bebda4c82e","b293dea5-f7e1-4889-a56d-f823569cdff4","b3b632d3-bab8-43e4-9749-51b79e59f7dd","b4a8aa1a-7262-4318-9579-9fff20f959a6","b556af30-b2db-4273-8b3b-a5b1ec113ebb","b55fc156-b5e6-49b6-b4f1-e092d3b4f553","b78601e1-6600-408f-bc8c-52407a676ecb","bc813ec4-3453-4fe2-a5d0-884fdb51bfc7","bcd183c8-344e-4cb8-8561-8c2e6a027897","bdc8358e-29a2-4efa-a99e-6023a27df35b","bf5cf44c-c3df-4c9c-b13b-8a0108b8a106","c0981bc0-6d81-46d5-a2fc-715c6a5662b8","c2875090-e4c1-4cec-be8a-7218c8774f6b","c349f006-e1f4-498e-970a-626a724e2231","c3aa82e4-0707-4514-a535-22d6d4a7f0b2","c51ad2dc-5440-4692-bdac-73968c6ad4d2","c6e1c64f-1094-4a24-9d3e-8103fb4d94ab","c6e6e3f3-bc85-48dc-ad18-bb08d31d7308","c7589046-9f75-46b4-bd78-c3fe0703df52","c7af7c66-9a6d-42c8-8695-bcd164ed856b","c999d71f-777d-4d80-9f37-37391f97acd4","caae3943-065a-475a-a6fe-f5706ce3db97","cb333cad-a0a7-4971-8f06-e4ca49e58c39","cbdf7850-c12b-44e7-9a2a-2e88994f389f","cddf4a6a-4d4e-4d8b-9631-734b807f7215","cf35dad3-c846-4c5e-91db-577efd256f78","cfa001c3-f0fc-45cd-8a71-3e35d2026e1f","cfd3be60-c380-4a63-8e12-5fd8af9b72bd","d18985ea-8239-498e-9147-eda1d0bb8bde","d2c92cf6-2a73-4e89-adff-db3cb523f8e1","d2f303e3-c25c-412f-8ae4-4ec525f68736","d315d00d-a3eb-4c0f-9554-c1395585910f","d3bd5582-331f-4b89-96d8-d988dabaecd2","d3c6617c-2925-40b2-aa72-9b0b6c5e83d4","d405b9b8-3fd3-4230-a3d3-ccdd34abd185","d5ff3294-0ecd-48eb-b9dd-a2c0282a055a","d6f9dd1e-cee9-48ff-a7e7-71d7a7b8f61d","d7c49d74-0c9c-470b-94ad-c7ccaa111eaf","d9794536-257f-4a12-8d46-a7c0c649fb97","dc0f107c-d6af-40f2-b8fd-d6a8264071a5","dd99547d-81d1-4764-ba78-52a1cddf906d","ddada193-97b9-4ccc-8a51-bfbea77a0c06","df6dd614-6785-4c3a-b6c7-1e091a751c64","e06bafea-36a4-40ac-8e47-2a2619fd46fd","e1955bc5-123d-4ca0-b875-2d75b1f718f1","e1bbca7c-14db-40cf-a128-0219f12466a3","e256486b-ee32-4d0f-9cba-d02bf4bd780a","e27aa94c-fa47-4a58-bc17-1e5d3387b739","e2f38cc3-06ff-4db2-8aad-a537c1e1d0c8","e446ef0a-2a74-42bf-bcd6-2b793506650e","e6d36e44-00e2-4f9e-95b1-e892e44117eb","e70df749-9305-44b3-8a30-defc332a7fa4","e9029bad-f0af-4178-8545-61b8bf20d98f","ea0bba2c-7a56-40f2-afac-00f638b54fc3","ea27969f-7a0b-4e5c-9893-7763d5fdbfbf","ea51c75b-4b85-48fb-bbb7-8fde23c110aa","ea6c8861-7a39-4e19-8e71-58720131fa8d","eb7f5240-b11f-4c58-9681-91c05d2c3f50","eb84cbb3-24d1-4565-9ec1-8bd3b9d4bec9","efb7c5ac-4ac5-4964-80cb-f95ebaa0e04c","f1f602c9-64cd-4bfc-855c-fb8060a9c483","f24f8cd0-0ca1-49cf-8cf1-4a5e6b938fe3","f267ac1f-eff8-417a-8920-f8d37e384f79","f289c668-0c40-41e6-82af-ae6829b262d4","f319102d-533a-41ff-9f08-6bda6778bb7e","f5653eaf-7d13-4c91-93c7-e30daca2ec3a","f5c77efa-f72b-424c-a810-81cd552ba3de","f6e3366d-13bc-4a60-94b6-f77a2c2032c0","f75dd4aa-d0bc-4078-857d-76a41f9df08f","fa1e38b4-4ced-4f4b-9a7b-b1b89ff13da7","faaca14c-514a-4f25-897a-cd9bbc31d5d0","fb4d21e7-be93-4775-905f-977427db28c4","fc91133d-e4b6-4458-8d6c-cb1af7bcd97e","fdc662ec-5ed7-4d04-8993-6144ff01abc2","fe4e9bc0-2802-4dd8-97e4-27704fad2a1b","fec4e8d2-6a2f-4046-b9d4-85a831f76655","oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-055a850c7fce9512","oil-05aa031a4b58524e","oil-06d5928124689ba0","oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-081117bbf714a215","oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0","oil-0d7b13a282f9b466","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","oil-156fd0980ec51fe6","oil-1852e8a212bd5903","oil-1c3f4e35a1252449","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-23d97461886d2622","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-438415c185832786","oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-4b88eb2520f8cc22","oil-4bd4c6831e9c7077","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-5413f17944743156","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-63426d939d718e7f","oil-63f43befc46e25fa","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-7269f661e72c703f","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-7ced813eb9eb1314","oil-7ed3f9582cae741d","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-86a403aef71f924e","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-94951aba738c80b3","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-9f582ea75e0eddfb","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-a882a3e8b7aeb487","oil-a9685f88d15906f6","oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-b434a85e1e9196d0","oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","oil-c1a2f95596a3b00d","oil-c2fa50179af284f7","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-c4d815318f8299b0","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-c94e003c369b3450","oil-ce4031737a7654b3","oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","oil-d479413f1e610f85","oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-e1cd585e16b9635b","oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","oil-e72f16ac2686175c","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f1693a0670f7b784","oil-f5b6386895404f0b","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-f96a10806285c261","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-fba2e5ff157abb74","oil-fc714f38909e4348","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","oil-fcda56b4bb45ffd3","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9","oil-ff34df409a4806f1"],"entries":[{"id":"detection_methods:entry:regulatory-field-detection:other-enforcement-detection","name":"Other enforcement detection","definition":"A normalized detection methods concept combining 93 extracted labels.","occurrences":183,"article_count":173,"event_count":175,"article_ids":["008cc0e4-d7d7-475f-80d8-d81621e7b862","0109eea0-3adc-4177-a6f7-e3bc31bf237d","03ea9124-befd-4983-bcdc-147e3ed3bf73","04c00967-a247-4802-b3c2-3f266885c385","0932679a-fe82-4a1e-949e-9d4fd17ed2a0","0a23e582-3dac-4091-bf36-a08d511a3763","0a342064-5378-4aff-b4aa-34ae5c1ab66b","0af3703f-23ec-4f8f-a1b6-45b4adb68b12","0d14295d-a954-4163-8974-ecb51bd464e8","102a4953-33a2-4842-827e-987e3bb6ce7a","141518ef-ce68-4969-bb2a-66f56733fab2","18f4411e-1d84-42c5-835a-97436ad30c7c","1933f8f5-8812-4e24-85bd-cdbdc83f929e","1addfba0-b7e9-4722-85be-a642cdf63571","1b1069d2-3f50-4dd3-a8bd-0aeed6bacf98","1c8fe57c-2cee-4f73-a5f3-6ee4051024e7","1df33743-1016-49ce-981b-862125c0893f","1fe9639d-5c39-472e-94a7-73ac2b03bfce","2010c6e2-c9cb-4a3e-b22b-8cabf1044074","2013c452-d1c8-41a0-abea-92e26d231790","21fb2b00-9b86-4924-9a0d-248f976cfd93","22261df7-8974-447f-a1cf-192c59528f64","2255e304-d6ef-4707-b594-cbc3955019ec","22bf4101-c33b-4711-b6e3-379968f7c217","2499d49c-748f-41d8-84d9-eed7a66ad43a","255ac21d-c17e-4926-9dad-13db7698ed72","2719a94d-d523-4fef-bfd9-a1bef16dd951","29a173b3-4587-4257-9c93-2f0c483079c5","2a59f77c-89ba-49fe-be6c-b3c9756a9940","2f23ec7d-e712-46f5-ae1c-5e7634725242","2fc5c9f1-64d2-498f-8f7a-96d94b926f6d","301bb818-ff44-4346-9ffe-ad58bf13cfb2","3278338f-1fa0-4045-9701-e237d5ad0930","3282adec-c328-4317-a091-a126587d78de","32bc8e29-1313-4d9b-86ff-8c3bb665f057","3865528e-cbb8-4615-af7d-f9ab01e9fe4d","3911de79-cbfd-4eaa-9311-207b452faa93","39e61860-2a60-448c-838e-a7f01e4d0c5c","3cdd0ffb-841b-4883-9b1a-df7b28022554","3d6b98eb-c79e-460c-883b-9c997ffea009","3e2829b3-2380-49cb-a370-77a313e8eaa1","43e20f96-27cb-4f67-b7e5-6228aea8e7b6","471bc3da-bbd4-417c-875a-595a713be7fd","47635cd8-696c-4adf-94ed-338f084a3d62","4974f73f-37bc-4300-8d31-d97ca337365b","4c67d899-fab5-4e78-9274-526d6a4fe0bb","4cd73621-691c-4866-91c1-0b99d0d1a89a","4d6ab7d0-4e16-4d1b-aa49-7f453c9352b6","4d7063c6-5201-4ce1-89ed-75ee21d51b98","526515f5-4a82-4b0b-9e1c-7f3a2aa4cde4","534ab39c-32c3-46ea-a742-5095170a0003","53f8ec9a-900f-481f-bfb5-a6ca452416ed","5406e730-2d78-47b4-ba27-fc933e691eab","54637d34-f16e-4e98-84c1-681a0fca559c","54686005-b842-4cc5-82b1-0276e36a42b6","57b2326c-e877-4995-82fc-221eda139718","58ac029e-4204-42c4-8ff3-6dbd84dd382a","5c86116b-5fae-45a9-b467-01fc8b26a166","5d222c9b-8733-4d3b-abaa-59f77da35546","5fa4530c-d60b-48c1-b6b2-371abff6d77a","60ccacb1-7c41-4259-b651-bfbf60e7b53a","6135126e-45b3-4fe7-a80f-82248b08ea7b","62bc0e3c-1d90-4688-bc1b-e00f620c5c8c","6411a3a1-2932-41eb-b497-f9a2400de74c","66bb816a-1961-4e45-8460-9328304c7956","672ecfdb-cb9d-485d-8fc1-76e6a8269fe7","68753b50-8fe7-4499-bb2d-ddfcc7e16c94","6ab671c9-310c-4d88-bd88-0251180b2345","6ee56cf3-78f2-4420-bede-08f76397b2fb","706246bb-b5c8-4d73-81fa-2e93d040c762","706f0136-7ae5-45f2-b804-e3a8c9a14d1c","70b9c7ef-3983-40dd-b904-5607537ff37f","73369c4a-c44b-4b7a-b3cc-07766ccb4e2a","73e97a89-5b5f-4104-bc6a-50b8f564040a","7855cb39-b177-4d3b-bd72-0a18afd5415b","7a539249-77a2-4e2b-a29f-6952304d80d7","7a707681-5edc-461c-b5a8-0057a374f3cc","816a43e1-6b33-4a27-a385-9d12dd8e924f","81b21166-1d16-4aec-910f-b382f9680f5f","8205ac1a-be22-438c-b3e0-f7aa463d3501","824601ea-5309-4ddf-bc61-486c992e309c","83bf777b-6ee5-4e82-bd85-6e374853473a","84512e93-e51a-4c89-88dd-ecc2afc0699a","84ea460e-bfc2-4977-aebb-32594a90693b","8577ca11-d1ef-4517-846f-747a51b46f07","867c2a12-155a-4309-aff0-300c6125824c","8779026e-22f2-4276-a7b9-695e4e569057","8e4f2f4a-8039-4ba0-9b6d-beecad106136","8ecfae6d-fb77-4dfe-9f9b-f1425d8a13da","8ef8782e-cc91-4ddc-95d5-d260f1b7a518","93c87fee-61ec-4ea8-bd4f-3434669835ee","946d9238-09b9-474e-8481-5e734cedca7a","96adc5c1-5a68-473e-9d38-85bed792c8fc","9c74f902-2ef0-4269-b436-acc19aa11ea5","9f454843-a34c-4619-a576-493f835993b4","a06cd968-9dc5-42c5-a6e8-3d3c36dfc8c2","a45c3495-d077-4241-b1d7-72fa109d0e6b","a96905fe-9d68-4a0c-9c4e-ce250411fcd9","a9c15856-f188-45d4-80a8-7929118af59a","aa57f0d8-8cb4-4c4c-8ef4-4c4acdef25e4","ab7d0ab2-d774-415c-bd3f-a606f92ef3c3","ac5e071a-48a2-4a53-a1f6-5fc7b6d35280","adad636e-6844-49cb-bb07-54ff4f1a044f","add15855-56e0-4264-819c-b8e8110846aa","aec84261-126b-4386-b0f4-15f160ca67ae","b26721cc-ba4b-460e-a726-17bebda4c82e","b293dea5-f7e1-4889-a56d-f823569cdff4","b78601e1-6600-408f-bc8c-52407a676ecb","bc813ec4-3453-4fe2-a5d0-884fdb51bfc7","bcd183c8-344e-4cb8-8561-8c2e6a027897","bdc8358e-29a2-4efa-a99e-6023a27df35b","c0981bc0-6d81-46d5-a2fc-715c6a5662b8","c2875090-e4c1-4cec-be8a-7218c8774f6b","c51ad2dc-5440-4692-bdac-73968c6ad4d2","c6e1c64f-1094-4a24-9d3e-8103fb4d94ab","c6e6e3f3-bc85-48dc-ad18-bb08d31d7308","c7589046-9f75-46b4-bd78-c3fe0703df52","c7af7c66-9a6d-42c8-8695-bcd164ed856b","c999d71f-777d-4d80-9f37-37391f97acd4","caae3943-065a-475a-a6fe-f5706ce3db97","cb333cad-a0a7-4971-8f06-e4ca49e58c39","cbdf7850-c12b-44e7-9a2a-2e88994f389f","cddf4a6a-4d4e-4d8b-9631-734b807f7215","cf35dad3-c846-4c5e-91db-577efd256f78","cfa001c3-f0fc-45cd-8a71-3e35d2026e1f","d2c92cf6-2a73-4e89-adff-db3cb523f8e1","d3bd5582-331f-4b89-96d8-d988dabaecd2","d3c6617c-2925-40b2-aa72-9b0b6c5e83d4","d405b9b8-3fd3-4230-a3d3-ccdd34abd185","d5ff3294-0ecd-48eb-b9dd-a2c0282a055a","d6f9dd1e-cee9-48ff-a7e7-71d7a7b8f61d","d7c49d74-0c9c-470b-94ad-c7ccaa111eaf","dc0f107c-d6af-40f2-b8fd-d6a8264071a5","dd99547d-81d1-4764-ba78-52a1cddf906d","ddada193-97b9-4ccc-8a51-bfbea77a0c06","e06bafea-36a4-40ac-8e47-2a2619fd46fd","e1955bc5-123d-4ca0-b875-2d75b1f718f1","e1bbca7c-14db-40cf-a128-0219f12466a3","e256486b-ee32-4d0f-9cba-d02bf4bd780a","e2f38cc3-06ff-4db2-8aad-a537c1e1d0c8","e446ef0a-2a74-42bf-bcd6-2b793506650e","e70df749-9305-44b3-8a30-defc332a7fa4","e9029bad-f0af-4178-8545-61b8bf20d98f","ea0bba2c-7a56-40f2-afac-00f638b54fc3","ea27969f-7a0b-4e5c-9893-7763d5fdbfbf","eb7f5240-b11f-4c58-9681-91c05d2c3f50","efb7c5ac-4ac5-4964-80cb-f95ebaa0e04c","f1f602c9-64cd-4bfc-855c-fb8060a9c483","f24f8cd0-0ca1-49cf-8cf1-4a5e6b938fe3","f289c668-0c40-41e6-82af-ae6829b262d4","f319102d-533a-41ff-9f08-6bda6778bb7e","f5c77efa-f72b-424c-a810-81cd552ba3de","f75dd4aa-d0bc-4078-857d-76a41f9df08f","fa1e38b4-4ced-4f4b-9a7b-b1b89ff13da7","fb4d21e7-be93-4775-905f-977427db28c4","fc91133d-e4b6-4458-8d6c-cb1af7bcd97e","fe4e9bc0-2802-4dd8-97e4-27704fad2a1b","oil-05aa031a4b58524e","oil-0d7b13a282f9b466","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-63426d939d718e7f","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-a882a3e8b7aeb487","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-f5b6386895404f0b","oil-f96a10806285c261","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9","oil-ff34df409a4806f1"],"ontology_types":["detection_method","enforcement_action","fflo:Authority","fflo:DetectionMethod","fflo:EnforcementAction","fflo:EvidenceSource","fflo:FieldTest","fflo:Investigation","fflo:InvestigationAgency","fflo:InvestigationMethod","fflo:LabConfirmed","fflo:LabTest","fflo:LaboratoryTest","fflo:RegulatoryAction","fflo:Report","fflo:Seizure","fflo:SensoryTest","fkg:DetectionMethod","fkg:InvestigationReport","fkg:Method","fkg:UnknownMethod","fso:Analysis","fso:AnalysisMethod","fso:AnalysisResult","fso:DetectionMethod","fso:Inspection","fso:Laboratory","regulatory_action"],"aliases":["adulteration checks","adulteration testing","allegation","alleged","brand_verification","busted","CBI investigation","CBI probe","CBI-led special investigation team","CFTRI analysis","CFTRI report","CFTRI testing","CFTRI-Mysore","chargesheet","chemical analysis","chemical_analysis","cholesterol analysis","clinical diagnosis","decoy operation","documentary analysis","documentary verification","e-nose","e-tongue","expert_statement","expert_verification","fatty acid analysis","fatty acid profile test","FDCA lab report","flagging","Food Safety on Wheels (FSW) test","forensic analysis","gas-liquid chromatography","high-performance liquid chromatography","human sensory perception","industry_insider_report","internal checks","internal probe","investigation","lab analysis","lab report","lab reports","law enforcement action","law_enforcement_action","law_enforcement_investigation","legal_proceedings","market vigil","media_report","medical investigation","medical_officer_statement","micro-DNA testing","NDDB analysis","NDDB CALF Lab Analysis","NDDB CALF report","NDDB report","NDDB testing","NDDB-CALF Lab analysis","official_report","on-site testing","one-man commission report","police_bust","police_investigation","political_allegation","preliminary inquiry","preliminary investigation","Preliminary on-site testing","preliminary_checks","public_accusation","quality tests","Raman spectroscopy","regulatory_action","regulatory_audit","regulatory_investigation","regulatory_seizure","Reichert-Miessl value test","remand report","remand_report","seizure","sensory evaluation","sensory_evaluation","sensory_test","SIT","SIT charge sheet","SIT investigation","SIT report","Special Investigation Team (SIT) probe","Special Investigation Team (SIT) report","Special Investigation Team investigation","Special Investigation Team probe","Special Investigation Team report","special_investigation_team_report","test conducted by a Central government-approved institution","test for other miscible oil","unknown"]},{"id":"detection_methods:entry:regulatory-field-detection:inspection","name":"Inspection","definition":"A normalized detection methods concept combining 12 extracted labels.","occurrences":104,"article_count":101,"event_count":104,"article_ids":["05375704-5b45-4e0a-b388-9944c0c5fc9f","0a23e582-3dac-4091-bf36-a08d511a3763","0aa842b8-1ac9-4243-a8b6-5d98d32d6089","0d96e6b1-57f6-4555-8711-703a6c818eea","10f36230-190b-4b13-8cfc-8d12c2f37080","1931e9b4-edf1-42ec-a9c4-00ff0cbcff9a","23a5dd2a-a53c-44b8-8b86-37e04d4cf1ee","2b442757-da6a-46e5-ae37-b083e00062d3","438c4f31-19bd-4ff3-bed4-035569ec6cbf","451d9824-7933-403d-beaa-1ac6398509c9","4fa075c9-a30f-47e5-8f09-158017bfd6d6","508d009a-650f-4e40-b03d-ebef9d2c069e","52bd3a8a-1c92-484d-8be6-5f7e4a7274e1","58163259-bc87-4025-a6cc-f3a0848b52cf","58679f65-396b-4b1f-b725-9907ebc9f038","61a00782-20f7-4170-b4e2-d9d9157b3a3c","634a0a0f-0899-427f-9396-6cc3c5442643","6f00035b-1437-428d-895c-a234866e29e0","8151434e-f600-47a9-93df-16b483e88961","84a895b3-81ad-42e9-b54d-614c66aca856","892c7a97-bb6b-47a5-9402-8a5293acf25b","94faca18-b471-4748-8bab-f399641cedbd","9cbf8104-4fa2-4365-bc32-09eb2d1c9381","9fe3b91d-3719-4260-926a-d5711bd1efc4","a18ba308-f8ab-4590-b466-daf80aa2b59c","a7002128-c4bc-48cd-bed1-46a529e69132","b3b632d3-bab8-43e4-9749-51b79e59f7dd","b4a8aa1a-7262-4318-9579-9fff20f959a6","b55fc156-b5e6-49b6-b4f1-e092d3b4f553","bf5cf44c-c3df-4c9c-b13b-8a0108b8a106","c349f006-e1f4-498e-970a-626a724e2231","c3aa82e4-0707-4514-a535-22d6d4a7f0b2","d2f303e3-c25c-412f-8ae4-4ec525f68736","df6dd614-6785-4c3a-b6c7-1e091a751c64","eb84cbb3-24d1-4565-9ec1-8bd3b9d4bec9","f267ac1f-eff8-417a-8920-f8d37e384f79","f5653eaf-7d13-4c91-93c7-e30daca2ec3a","faaca14c-514a-4f25-897a-cd9bbc31d5d0","fec4e8d2-6a2f-4046-b9d4-85a831f76655","oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-055a850c7fce9512","oil-06d5928124689ba0","oil-081117bbf714a215","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","oil-156fd0980ec51fe6","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-23d97461886d2622","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-438415c185832786","oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-4b88eb2520f8cc22","oil-4bd4c6831e9c7077","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-5413f17944743156","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-63f43befc46e25fa","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-7269f661e72c703f","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-86a403aef71f924e","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-94951aba738c80b3","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-9f582ea75e0eddfb","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-b434a85e1e9196d0","oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","oil-c2fa50179af284f7","oil-c4d815318f8299b0","oil-c94e003c369b3450","oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","oil-d479413f1e610f85","oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","oil-e1cd585e16b9635b","oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","oil-e72f16ac2686175c","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f1693a0670f7b784","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-fba2e5ff157abb74","oil-fc714f38909e4348","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5"],"ontology_types":["fflo:DetectionMethod","fflo:Inspection","fflo:InspectionMethod","fkg:DetectionMethod","fkg:Inspection","fso:Analysis","fso:DetectionMethod","fso:Inspection","fso:RegulatoryAction","inspection","regulatory_inspection"],"aliases":["detailed examination","in-depth examination","inspection","lab inspection","official_inspection","regulatory inspection","regulatory_inspection","routine inspection","routine_inspection","surprise inspection","visual inspection","visual_inspection"]},{"id":"detection_methods:entry:regulatory-field-detection:raid-or-search","name":"Raid or search","definition":"An enforcement visit or search of premises.","occurrences":72,"article_count":72,"event_count":72,"article_ids":["0e518ac8-dc53-4c79-938a-bd26c1142eeb","0facca96-d90c-4f21-ba98-356f7f6b1622","1de4a13b-1497-421e-b5bc-a8ebbc7a3b18","229a7f40-f956-476e-8c84-3fd9ed3d6c29","28a03096-e60c-4adb-b4fa-55f0bd28a95d","2fede3c0-46a7-46e8-a776-5a6fd6d3f08e","31cae76c-aa62-4328-bd40-368275f60e9f","34dc1c1f-d12c-4230-bb1c-e41b6961f288","36a70fc6-de5a-494c-9dc5-801fe7a7a53d","3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","3e325b99-7611-4f89-8963-7f79c5ac4105","4216dab3-b436-422a-a6ee-74b5858f7aa2","43de8661-2844-46b7-bb39-15eb17f6b82e","4726ed7e-d61a-4a2c-9e05-59cbaa4f1bf0","473ed916-1979-4222-b1e8-38d39c51fe03","502ff9a1-ac00-4ef2-96cb-0a0614085766","504dd102-6089-4fcb-a066-0006720862a7","5710a503-9fbe-46ae-abd5-2663069b70db","5a7bde0b-59e0-4f86-9b63-2bbebb593d41","6f4adcf4-c63b-41c9-b7f6-0b0f4e75c857","79f059b8-00b2-4345-ad46-440c7bc371df","7ddc7283-670a-4dfb-9e38-a11aa0c579c2","8187d86e-f46c-4e26-8188-a4e7b31de2f6","85680853-3899-4f21-b262-dbe3e8893779","86b559ac-3645-468b-9f43-7d961bd255d7","89e1831f-7c8d-46ad-b545-7b0e141b1fa7","8aaa4093-987c-4a1d-8fbd-8e1d1e495fe3","9368fe71-a18d-4580-8063-8e3f17e6cec9","9379cea2-647c-459b-af54-770e31e9bbe1","94d114b9-3c47-468e-8714-ed449f90e8e4","96621df7-0c9b-41e5-a5a6-3f21a24613d5","97c9d44f-1ca4-489d-a786-dc23f1fe1175","9c81b00b-87e1-4cce-bfc8-9583b3b8a234","9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","a3aeeb23-ea47-454e-9079-05e2142e157d","a6385d09-ca9d-4f95-b5ba-4f50630bec35","b556af30-b2db-4273-8b3b-a5b1ec113ebb","cfd3be60-c380-4a63-8e12-5fd8af9b72bd","d18985ea-8239-498e-9147-eda1d0bb8bde","d315d00d-a3eb-4c0f-9554-c1395585910f","d9794536-257f-4a12-8d46-a7c0c649fb97","e27aa94c-fa47-4a58-bc17-1e5d3387b739","e6d36e44-00e2-4f9e-95b1-e892e44117eb","ea51c75b-4b85-48fb-bbb7-8fde23c110aa","ea6c8861-7a39-4e19-8e71-58720131fa8d","f6e3366d-13bc-4a60-94b6-f77a2c2032c0","fdc662ec-5ed7-4d04-8993-6144ff01abc2","oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0","oil-1852e8a212bd5903","oil-1c3f4e35a1252449","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-7ced813eb9eb1314","oil-7ed3f9582cae741d","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-a9685f88d15906f6","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-c1a2f95596a3b00d","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-ce4031737a7654b3","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-fcda56b4bb45ffd3"],"ontology_types":["fflo:DetectionMethod","fflo:EnforcementAction","fflo:Inspection","fflo:RegulatoryAction","fkg:DetectionMethod","fkg:Method","fkg:PoliceRaid","fkg:RegulatoryAction","fso:DetectionMethod"],"aliases":["cordon and search","enforcement_raids","enforcement_search","Operation Oil","police raid","police_raid","raid","raids","regulatory raid","surprise raid","vigilance raid"]}]},{"id":"detection_methods:group:laboratory-and-analytical-detection","name":"Laboratory and analytical detection","definition":"Sampling, laboratory analysis, mobile testing, or other analytical methods.","occurrences":87,"article_count":85,"event_count":85,"article_ids":["0ef4d3e4-844c-47ee-a430-8f171ec4c000","194f3e22-f4b6-483b-9333-762c3a3b6b9d","1a806023-ac1d-4da2-924e-25821c2554f5","1c7ea343-020a-4266-9854-b12ebfa2cf50","1e6b9f5b-a065-4242-ae58-1f105455955f","22261df7-8974-447f-a1cf-192c59528f64","23ff1efe-782a-4174-8f33-41a3ff0e8c44","26ac5726-fd69-42b8-a80e-6a71b91ba466","33326887-4ed0-4562-a0ac-b889d6ad53a9","3624ed70-d464-4caa-9b4e-4dfc2ed435dc","394a5ff5-76f3-4885-87ed-4a6879611c22","3f674523-5416-4b89-8cab-fe3ddf3c9e7e","43de8661-2844-46b7-bb39-15eb17f6b82e","445ff19b-5429-4a55-be3f-c4b03481b04f","45fdd40d-5bc4-4fe7-9eb9-883c55f14a70","46441742-607f-484f-80fe-b1334048144a","4a021f95-539e-4217-98a0-d651be9a3b47","4eb18b90-e310-48db-9531-68b146420749","4f3026f8-7217-4bf9-af6e-71bcad8bb1c5","5245dc0a-5d68-4a00-ad89-6255f3bee930","550bda80-b5be-488a-89f6-64b9698b4033","55552c00-e696-4ac2-951e-156364cb1337","590fff58-7ba9-4a5b-8232-4c27d67f13b1","5f6c5fd0-a2f8-4bfe-9ac4-a8d06bc8640a","6721b632-2b4f-492a-840d-bb05d2a9f1af","6f4adcf4-c63b-41c9-b7f6-0b0f4e75c857","71196507-ad87-406f-a4df-edc8a14b1575","73066633-67a8-4240-8c5a-3c4ae29b486d","73369c4a-c44b-4b7a-b3cc-07766ccb4e2a","747400a0-bfad-4fa2-8004-06f237d1c543","75eac450-5d76-45da-975a-a47f1515ca01","75f7eb04-35fe-48ce-af4a-d0ccf3067076","7b3b345d-0902-4461-a6bc-747c26feb7f2","815dcb75-691c-4066-a898-b7ed46fdbdf2","81f9e1b1-71fd-45a2-9292-017420336059","835cbabf-d424-4f04-89cb-1d8c0b08f1ab","83bf777b-6ee5-4e82-bd85-6e374853473a","8b1ef2e6-f7a2-4db0-9589-42159cf06574","8d8b9ba9-5da4-4861-89db-348400c8ef68","9285d418-e4e3-40a1-b1d1-da857748bfd3","93ec7040-a06c-4da5-b0b1-626399456a8a","95044e07-ad37-43f6-95b0-cebe1e9f8ce0","95b8351c-9ddb-457d-9035-ad3b6d181dc7","9d92713b-a9c4-4b7e-87f4-c4fd443e38b5","a3ce7cd2-ee71-42ce-b4f7-96a81c6bd295","adfa4015-b34e-4488-99e4-b20b4dc10324","b4b614f7-a43d-4e57-9766-25f7fef90d68","bcd80071-6449-4036-accf-62939d2bc771","c2853c18-cc20-43b6-bd36-3b77725ba1d7","c4b35547-a0d3-4cad-b391-177ba64d7c63","c5597192-fe4a-479a-8bf7-cdcf15d74d10","ce0c52be-896a-479c-b92b-09bf3518d332","cf1f664f-fab8-46ef-9768-c3fc897d3913","d156577c-5001-4f1b-90f7-d7b21a37497b","d7f7d93d-fda2-48cd-89a3-7b5c35ec6480","d8ab6193-0742-4b7e-99ea-f1131b5fc36f","db8eb9e3-f6e6-4be4-b6d2-d135a6c3e9ac","dc9b6179-78d1-4eec-9df7-47aadc6c4002","e446ef0a-2a74-42bf-bcd6-2b793506650e","e57d61a5-e3ec-423d-ad96-243fbfae502b","e6e7e00b-0ede-4741-8419-066a93e431cd","e6f33250-4650-42ce-96e8-87ce7eebc853","edf6b48c-90dc-4757-814e-999556997808","eec20343-5ffa-486c-b431-59ca5e4568d4","ef391115-fde1-44aa-ab00-abb8e2e7ec82","f19a484a-77bd-4389-8266-523228328091","f25f2d19-18b4-4e7e-ad7b-8f30a193b3d6","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-42c4efcdce45e35d","oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-bd1df718191f8f6e","oil-c0e8fd0149fa83c4","oil-c72d68cafd2478be","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"entries":[{"id":"detection_methods:entry:laboratory-and-analytical-detection:laboratory-or-analytical-testing","name":"Laboratory or analytical testing","definition":"A normalized detection methods concept combining 24 extracted labels.","occurrences":78,"article_count":77,"event_count":77,"article_ids":["0ef4d3e4-844c-47ee-a430-8f171ec4c000","1a806023-ac1d-4da2-924e-25821c2554f5","1c7ea343-020a-4266-9854-b12ebfa2cf50","1e6b9f5b-a065-4242-ae58-1f105455955f","22261df7-8974-447f-a1cf-192c59528f64","26ac5726-fd69-42b8-a80e-6a71b91ba466","33326887-4ed0-4562-a0ac-b889d6ad53a9","3624ed70-d464-4caa-9b4e-4dfc2ed435dc","394a5ff5-76f3-4885-87ed-4a6879611c22","3f674523-5416-4b89-8cab-fe3ddf3c9e7e","43de8661-2844-46b7-bb39-15eb17f6b82e","445ff19b-5429-4a55-be3f-c4b03481b04f","45fdd40d-5bc4-4fe7-9eb9-883c55f14a70","46441742-607f-484f-80fe-b1334048144a","4a021f95-539e-4217-98a0-d651be9a3b47","4eb18b90-e310-48db-9531-68b146420749","4f3026f8-7217-4bf9-af6e-71bcad8bb1c5","5245dc0a-5d68-4a00-ad89-6255f3bee930","550bda80-b5be-488a-89f6-64b9698b4033","55552c00-e696-4ac2-951e-156364cb1337","590fff58-7ba9-4a5b-8232-4c27d67f13b1","5f6c5fd0-a2f8-4bfe-9ac4-a8d06bc8640a","6721b632-2b4f-492a-840d-bb05d2a9f1af","6f4adcf4-c63b-41c9-b7f6-0b0f4e75c857","71196507-ad87-406f-a4df-edc8a14b1575","73066633-67a8-4240-8c5a-3c4ae29b486d","73369c4a-c44b-4b7a-b3cc-07766ccb4e2a","747400a0-bfad-4fa2-8004-06f237d1c543","75eac450-5d76-45da-975a-a47f1515ca01","75f7eb04-35fe-48ce-af4a-d0ccf3067076","7b3b345d-0902-4461-a6bc-747c26feb7f2","815dcb75-691c-4066-a898-b7ed46fdbdf2","81f9e1b1-71fd-45a2-9292-017420336059","835cbabf-d424-4f04-89cb-1d8c0b08f1ab","83bf777b-6ee5-4e82-bd85-6e374853473a","8b1ef2e6-f7a2-4db0-9589-42159cf06574","8d8b9ba9-5da4-4861-89db-348400c8ef68","9285d418-e4e3-40a1-b1d1-da857748bfd3","93ec7040-a06c-4da5-b0b1-626399456a8a","95044e07-ad37-43f6-95b0-cebe1e9f8ce0","95b8351c-9ddb-457d-9035-ad3b6d181dc7","9d92713b-a9c4-4b7e-87f4-c4fd443e38b5","a3ce7cd2-ee71-42ce-b4f7-96a81c6bd295","adfa4015-b34e-4488-99e4-b20b4dc10324","b4b614f7-a43d-4e57-9766-25f7fef90d68","bcd80071-6449-4036-accf-62939d2bc771","c2853c18-cc20-43b6-bd36-3b77725ba1d7","c4b35547-a0d3-4cad-b391-177ba64d7c63","c5597192-fe4a-479a-8bf7-cdcf15d74d10","ce0c52be-896a-479c-b92b-09bf3518d332","cf1f664f-fab8-46ef-9768-c3fc897d3913","d156577c-5001-4f1b-90f7-d7b21a37497b","d7f7d93d-fda2-48cd-89a3-7b5c35ec6480","d8ab6193-0742-4b7e-99ea-f1131b5fc36f","db8eb9e3-f6e6-4be4-b6d2-d135a6c3e9ac","dc9b6179-78d1-4eec-9df7-47aadc6c4002","e446ef0a-2a74-42bf-bcd6-2b793506650e","e57d61a5-e3ec-423d-ad96-243fbfae502b","e6e7e00b-0ede-4741-8419-066a93e431cd","e6f33250-4650-42ce-96e8-87ce7eebc853","edf6b48c-90dc-4757-814e-999556997808","eec20343-5ffa-486c-b431-59ca5e4568d4","ef391115-fde1-44aa-ab00-abb8e2e7ec82","f19a484a-77bd-4389-8266-523228328091","f25f2d19-18b4-4e7e-ad7b-8f30a193b3d6","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-42c4efcdce45e35d","oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"ontology_types":["fflo:DetectionMethod","fflo:EvidenceSource","fflo:Lab","fflo:LabTest","fflo:LabTesting","fflo:LaboratoryTest","fflo:Testing","fkg:DetectionMethod","fkg:Method","fso:Analysis","fso:DetectionMethod","fso:Laboratory","fso:TestingMethod","laboratory_analysis","laboratory_testing"],"aliases":["acid value test","CFTRI laboratory report","high-tech lab test","independent laboratory tests","lab test","lab testing","lab_test","lab_testing","laboratory analysis","laboratory reports from the central food technological research institute (CFTRI), Mysuru","laboratory test","laboratory testing","laboratory tests","laboratory_analysis","laboratory_testing","LaboratoryTest","mobile food testing laboratory","mobile lab testing","nature of oil test","NDDB lab test","NDDB–CALF laboratory","preliminary analysis","routine surveillance and laboratory testing","state food lab testing"]},{"id":"detection_methods:entry:laboratory-and-analytical-detection:sampling","name":"Sampling","definition":"A normalized detection methods concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":5,"article_count":5,"event_count":5,"article_ids":["23ff1efe-782a-4174-8f33-41a3ff0e8c44","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-bd1df718191f8f6e","oil-c0e8fd0149fa83c4"],"ontology_types":["fflo:DetectionMethod","fkg:DetectionMethod","fso:DetectionMethod","fso:Sampling"],"aliases":["sampling"]},{"id":"detection_methods:entry:laboratory-and-analytical-detection:on-site-or-mobile-testing","name":"On-site or mobile testing","definition":"A normalized detection methods concept combining 3 extracted labels.","occurrences":4,"article_count":4,"event_count":4,"article_ids":["194f3e22-f4b6-483b-9333-762c3a3b6b9d","46441742-607f-484f-80fe-b1334048144a","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-c72d68cafd2478be"],"ontology_types":["fflo:DetectionMethod","fflo:FieldTest","on-site_testing"],"aliases":["Food Safety on Wheels (FSW) mobile testing unit","mobile testing vans","on-the-spot testing"]}]},{"id":"detection_methods:group:complaint-and-intelligence-detection","name":"Complaint and intelligence detection","definition":"Complaints, tips, whistleblowers, intelligence, or public media reports.","occurrences":54,"article_count":53,"event_count":54,"article_ids":["0ea7c6a7-d2c1-498f-aa00-f3fc942206ed","15f9d255-f348-4fb7-ba3d-003ab6adcfb2","164f43df-a069-4197-9854-e7bd9fc78fae","1a87f314-ec7e-4407-96f2-0995e8d26fc0","292b562c-132b-47cc-9030-d2544e801e7e","2ad1f047-985c-4c59-aa13-749fa75bcba9","2d8a95d1-8554-4194-b427-4239c3f9ad5b","2fe1bef6-e797-4d9f-bb5b-6f936d7a55dc","31cae76c-aa62-4328-bd40-368275f60e9f","3278338f-1fa0-4045-9701-e237d5ad0930","3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","3c0e9d23-f858-47eb-8e7a-23db1d42822a","4726ed7e-d61a-4a2c-9e05-59cbaa4f1bf0","4a638904-2bcf-4037-8afd-ec6e5b0b6b11","620bfde0-ec72-4b52-bfa4-e06ce3b56960","897c7de9-ed19-4ee2-a2d5-85b75355519d","91aa9ca8-e7d7-4036-a22f-5c8c8e7fc2ce","9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","a7cc57e8-71f7-4536-ba7c-452e09344a18","add15855-56e0-4264-819c-b8e8110846aa","b3e58970-8bf0-4e37-a8f9-dd4fce60bf46","b5940660-7f58-4123-bb25-6f78d4e1694d","c6b3635d-7479-4594-9803-195c9d36f4a1","c7803b74-2f5d-47d0-a09e-c27ed98ec1a3","d18985ea-8239-498e-9147-eda1d0bb8bde","d301dc8a-7194-46ad-bf04-43efdc78c053","dab486f0-dfe1-46a8-b0d8-32e2a200b8e8","e1bbca7c-14db-40cf-a128-0219f12466a3","eb84cbb3-24d1-4565-9ec1-8bd3b9d4bec9","ed2c35d4-102a-4b73-8382-2ac35610faed","eec20343-5ffa-486c-b431-59ca5e4568d4","f1307eae-cbfb-4f04-b6cc-3facd9e296d6","f62defd3-7975-4edf-8f34-40a36b487ac8","oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-66b89ef48f4536a9","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-a0831d014f72baf3","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-fc5474312cf8529f"],"entries":[{"id":"detection_methods:entry:complaint-and-intelligence-detection:tip-off-or-intelligence","name":"Tip-off or intelligence","definition":"A normalized detection methods concept combining 9 extracted labels.","occurrences":33,"article_count":32,"event_count":33,"article_ids":["0ea7c6a7-d2c1-498f-aa00-f3fc942206ed","292b562c-132b-47cc-9030-d2544e801e7e","2ad1f047-985c-4c59-aa13-749fa75bcba9","2d8a95d1-8554-4194-b427-4239c3f9ad5b","31cae76c-aa62-4328-bd40-368275f60e9f","3278338f-1fa0-4045-9701-e237d5ad0930","3c0e9d23-f858-47eb-8e7a-23db1d42822a","4726ed7e-d61a-4a2c-9e05-59cbaa4f1bf0","4a638904-2bcf-4037-8afd-ec6e5b0b6b11","620bfde0-ec72-4b52-bfa4-e06ce3b56960","91aa9ca8-e7d7-4036-a22f-5c8c8e7fc2ce","9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","b3e58970-8bf0-4e37-a8f9-dd4fce60bf46","b5940660-7f58-4123-bb25-6f78d4e1694d","c6b3635d-7479-4594-9803-195c9d36f4a1","d18985ea-8239-498e-9147-eda1d0bb8bde","d301dc8a-7194-46ad-bf04-43efdc78c053","dab486f0-dfe1-46a8-b0d8-32e2a200b8e8","eb84cbb3-24d1-4565-9ec1-8bd3b9d4bec9","ed2c35d4-102a-4b73-8382-2ac35610faed","eec20343-5ffa-486c-b431-59ca5e4568d4","f1307eae-cbfb-4f04-b6cc-3facd9e296d6","f62defd3-7975-4edf-8f34-40a36b487ac8","oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-66b89ef48f4536a9","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8"],"ontology_types":["fflo:DetectionMethod","fflo:TipOff","fkg:DetectionMethod","fso:DetectionMethod"],"aliases":["confidential tip","intelligence","intelligence_based","public_tip","social media video","tip","tip off","tip-off","whistleblower report"]},{"id":"detection_methods:entry:complaint-and-intelligence-detection:complaint","name":"Complaint","definition":"A normalized detection methods concept combining 3 extracted labels.","occurrences":21,"article_count":21,"event_count":21,"article_ids":["15f9d255-f348-4fb7-ba3d-003ab6adcfb2","164f43df-a069-4197-9854-e7bd9fc78fae","1a87f314-ec7e-4407-96f2-0995e8d26fc0","2fe1bef6-e797-4d9f-bb5b-6f936d7a55dc","3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","897c7de9-ed19-4ee2-a2d5-85b75355519d","a7cc57e8-71f7-4536-ba7c-452e09344a18","add15855-56e0-4264-819c-b8e8110846aa","c7803b74-2f5d-47d0-a09e-c27ed98ec1a3","e1bbca7c-14db-40cf-a128-0219f12466a3","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-a0831d014f72baf3","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-fc5474312cf8529f"],"ontology_types":["fflo:Complaint","fflo:DetectionMethod","fkg:DetectionMethod","fso:DetectionMethod"],"aliases":["complaint","complaints","consumer_complaint"]}]},{"id":"detection_methods:group:survey-and-surveillance-detection","name":"Survey and surveillance detection","definition":"Organized market surveys, surveillance, or monitoring programmes.","occurrences":7,"article_count":7,"event_count":7,"article_ids":["c8ddee14-df38-49aa-9d85-a7c6b34273a6","oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-846611108e27fafb","oil-8e1ede70f7533502","oil-9c21da748413e6f9","oil-fc5474312cf8529f"],"entries":[{"id":"detection_methods:entry:survey-and-surveillance-detection:survey-or-surveillance","name":"Survey or surveillance","definition":"A normalized detection methods concept combining 6 extracted labels.","occurrences":7,"article_count":7,"event_count":7,"article_ids":["c8ddee14-df38-49aa-9d85-a7c6b34273a6","oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-846611108e27fafb","oil-8e1ede70f7533502","oil-9c21da748413e6f9","oil-fc5474312cf8529f"],"ontology_types":["fflo:DetectionMethod","fflo:Surveillance","fflo:SurveyAggregated","fkg:DetectionMethod"],"aliases":["all-India sample survey","food safety department survey","market surveillance","market_report","routine_market_survey","surveillance"]}]},{"id":"detection_methods:group:specialist-or-documentary-review","name":"Specialist or documentary review","definition":"Company, record, medical-history, or other specialist examination.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77"],"entries":[{"id":"detection_methods:entry:specialist-or-documentary-review:specialist-or-documentary-review","name":"Specialist or documentary review","definition":"A normalized detection methods concept combining 2 extracted labels.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77"],"ontology_types":["fflo:DetectionMethod","fkg:DetectionMethod"],"aliases":["company_examination","medical history review"]}]}]},{"id":"ontology_predicates","label":"Ontology relationships","description":"FFLO or provenance predicates appearing in retained article triplets.","groups":[{"id":"ontology_predicates:group:food-composition-and-adulteration","name":"Food composition and adulteration","definition":"Relationships describing food identity, composition, adulterants, fraud, and substitution.","occurrences":1758,"article_count":457,"event_count":457,"article_ids":["0109eea0-3adc-4177-a6f7-e3bc31bf237d","030df41e-ccfc-4023-a026-89cc92bf3253","03ea9124-befd-4983-bcdc-147e3ed3bf73","04c00967-a247-4802-b3c2-3f266885c385","05937ca4-de64-422f-ba56-878f6152027c","0932679a-fe82-4a1e-949e-9d4fd17ed2a0","0a113e2a-26d3-45e4-9064-7cfa2f39230b","0a342064-5378-4aff-b4aa-34ae5c1ab66b","0aa842b8-1ac9-4243-a8b6-5d98d32d6089","0af3703f-23ec-4f8f-a1b6-45b4adb68b12","0b5a50e0-df3b-42ea-83c6-80bc16cf39fb","0d14295d-a954-4163-8974-ecb51bd464e8","0d96e6b1-57f6-4555-8711-703a6c818eea","0e464dfa-d504-4806-9005-c1ba38758bf8","0e518ac8-dc53-4c79-938a-bd26c1142eeb","0ea7c6a7-d2c1-498f-aa00-f3fc942206ed","0ef4d3e4-844c-47ee-a430-8f171ec4c000","0f7493be-b335-4851-9029-9e87ba0da155","0facca96-d90c-4f21-ba98-356f7f6b1622","102a4953-33a2-4842-827e-987e3bb6ce7a","10f36230-190b-4b13-8cfc-8d12c2f37080","141518ef-ce68-4969-bb2a-66f56733fab2","164f43df-a069-4197-9854-e7bd9fc78fae","178d6244-50cd-4bea-8e16-f951f6227a8c","18f4411e-1d84-42c5-835a-97436ad30c7c","1933f8f5-8812-4e24-85bd-cdbdc83f929e","194f3e22-f4b6-483b-9333-762c3a3b6b9d","1a066d87-0093-4ca8-9c10-84c004b76c48","1a806023-ac1d-4da2-924e-25821c2554f5","1a87f314-ec7e-4407-96f2-0995e8d26fc0","1ae756d4-675e-4a08-bc7d-ba6a3e922d5d","1b1069d2-3f50-4dd3-a8bd-0aeed6bacf98","1bb0d3e5-6f04-4d91-a899-8b6f59bc228a","1c7ea343-020a-4266-9854-b12ebfa2cf50","1c8fe57c-2cee-4f73-a5f3-6ee4051024e7","1de4a13b-1497-421e-b5bc-a8ebbc7a3b18","1de65c17-36dd-4ba6-ada6-bcd98b556aad","1df33743-1016-49ce-981b-862125c0893f","1e6b9f5b-a065-4242-ae58-1f105455955f","1fe9639d-5c39-472e-94a7-73ac2b03bfce","2010c6e2-c9cb-4a3e-b22b-8cabf1044074","2013c452-d1c8-41a0-abea-92e26d231790","21fb2b00-9b86-4924-9a0d-248f976cfd93","22261df7-8974-447f-a1cf-192c59528f64","2255e304-d6ef-4707-b594-cbc3955019ec","229a7f40-f956-476e-8c84-3fd9ed3d6c29","23a5dd2a-a53c-44b8-8b86-37e04d4cf1ee","23ff1efe-782a-4174-8f33-41a3ff0e8c44","2499d49c-748f-41d8-84d9-eed7a66ad43a","255ac21d-c17e-4926-9dad-13db7698ed72","2679a7a3-abde-4979-ac6e-5cf24113e0db","26ac5726-fd69-42b8-a80e-6a71b91ba466","26b11917-4e55-41d5-aeb1-64e8b44bedba","2719a94d-d523-4fef-bfd9-a1bef16dd951","28a03096-e60c-4adb-b4fa-55f0bd28a95d","292b562c-132b-47cc-9030-d2544e801e7e","29a173b3-4587-4257-9c93-2f0c483079c5","2ad1f047-985c-4c59-aa13-749fa75bcba9","2b442757-da6a-46e5-ae37-b083e00062d3","2c075e82-3fe3-4b95-a68a-f0fad41e51f5","2d8a95d1-8554-4194-b427-4239c3f9ad5b","2fc5c9f1-64d2-498f-8f7a-96d94b926f6d","2fe1bef6-e797-4d9f-bb5b-6f936d7a55dc","2fede3c0-46a7-46e8-a776-5a6fd6d3f08e","301bb818-ff44-4346-9ffe-ad58bf13cfb2","31cae76c-aa62-4328-bd40-368275f60e9f","31f1f824-c698-4b97-a52a-1a1136a9ac6e","3278338f-1fa0-4045-9701-e237d5ad0930","3282adec-c328-4317-a091-a126587d78de","32bc8e29-1313-4d9b-86ff-8c3bb665f057","33326887-4ed0-4562-a0ac-b889d6ad53a9","336a89c4-d98a-4242-8803-4d479689bc4d","3401730f-3850-4c7d-884f-dcdb1d086c42","34b8b88f-e283-46cd-ba6e-f373dc3d4395","34dc1c1f-d12c-4230-bb1c-e41b6961f288","3624ed70-d464-4caa-9b4e-4dfc2ed435dc","368930a7-2085-43bd-bb79-62d471c9e75c","36a70fc6-de5a-494c-9dc5-801fe7a7a53d","3797cfc4-05a5-422b-b823-ed3bb850f540","3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","3865528e-cbb8-4615-af7d-f9ab01e9fe4d","38d24327-d93d-472b-99ac-246351c7dbfd","394a5ff5-76f3-4885-87ed-4a6879611c22","39a9fb26-817d-404e-a150-4e4c5ebc037c","39e61860-2a60-448c-838e-a7f01e4d0c5c","3c0e9d23-f858-47eb-8e7a-23db1d42822a","3cdd0ffb-841b-4883-9b1a-df7b28022554","3d6b98eb-c79e-460c-883b-9c997ffea009","3e2829b3-2380-49cb-a370-77a313e8eaa1","3e325b99-7611-4f89-8963-7f79c5ac4105","3f674523-5416-4b89-8cab-fe3ddf3c9e7e","411b1d1a-7b18-4425-90f0-da2c296625eb","4216dab3-b436-422a-a6ee-74b5858f7aa2","4260e03f-c3cd-480c-827c-7ebe3a09e913","4299b01d-c5ab-4283-ae2d-31aa1fdbbfec","432f2c6e-3092-44cd-bf1b-54249b31ad6b","438c4f31-19bd-4ff3-bed4-035569ec6cbf","43de8661-2844-46b7-bb39-15eb17f6b82e","43e20f96-27cb-4f67-b7e5-6228aea8e7b6","445ff19b-5429-4a55-be3f-c4b03481b04f","4469e268-1b01-49b7-a436-ea4a88ba6269","451d9824-7933-403d-beaa-1ac6398509c9","45fdd40d-5bc4-4fe7-9eb9-883c55f14a70","471bc3da-bbd4-417c-875a-595a713be7fd","473ed916-1979-4222-b1e8-38d39c51fe03","47635cd8-696c-4adf-94ed-338f084a3d62","484a6113-0a95-4624-8291-c00710260e4d","4974f73f-37bc-4300-8d31-d97ca337365b","4a021f95-539e-4217-98a0-d651be9a3b47","4a638904-2bcf-4037-8afd-ec6e5b0b6b11","4c67d899-fab5-4e78-9274-526d6a4fe0bb","4cd73621-691c-4866-91c1-0b99d0d1a89a","4d7063c6-5201-4ce1-89ed-75ee21d51b98","4eb18b90-e310-48db-9531-68b146420749","4f3026f8-7217-4bf9-af6e-71bcad8bb1c5","4fa075c9-a30f-47e5-8f09-158017bfd6d6","502ff9a1-ac00-4ef2-96cb-0a0614085766","508d009a-650f-4e40-b03d-ebef9d2c069e","5118358f-2777-4bfd-a761-adb4bc1da763","51a534c1-9193-4b8c-bbd2-b4e368930ead","5245dc0a-5d68-4a00-ad89-6255f3bee930","5374dadc-cd7f-41df-b8d9-8ef7c10ec693","53f8ec9a-900f-481f-bfb5-a6ca452416ed","5406e730-2d78-47b4-ba27-fc933e691eab","54637d34-f16e-4e98-84c1-681a0fca559c","54686005-b842-4cc5-82b1-0276e36a42b6","550bda80-b5be-488a-89f6-64b9698b4033","554708da-6872-4a1b-91cc-3beeb59fbf2e","55552c00-e696-4ac2-951e-156364cb1337","5710a503-9fbe-46ae-abd5-2663069b70db","57b2326c-e877-4995-82fc-221eda139718","5804b97c-c416-49d1-9fbd-5bb52c0595dd","58163259-bc87-4025-a6cc-f3a0848b52cf","58ac029e-4204-42c4-8ff3-6dbd84dd382a","58c8e8bf-9cbd-46dd-8a8b-b1b5cbb0d58d","590fff58-7ba9-4a5b-8232-4c27d67f13b1","5a7bde0b-59e0-4f86-9b63-2bbebb593d41","5c86116b-5fae-45a9-b467-01fc8b26a166","5d222c9b-8733-4d3b-abaa-59f77da35546","5f6c5fd0-a2f8-4bfe-9ac4-a8d06bc8640a","5fa4530c-d60b-48c1-b6b2-371abff6d77a","60ccacb1-7c41-4259-b651-bfbf60e7b53a","6135126e-45b3-4fe7-a80f-82248b08ea7b","620bfde0-ec72-4b52-bfa4-e06ce3b56960","62bc0e3c-1d90-4688-bc1b-e00f620c5c8c","634a0a0f-0899-427f-9396-6cc3c5442643","6411a3a1-2932-41eb-b497-f9a2400de74c","64902247-dbff-448d-987f-c89ac2e30538","66bb816a-1961-4e45-8460-9328304c7956","6721b632-2b4f-492a-840d-bb05d2a9f1af","672ecfdb-cb9d-485d-8fc1-76e6a8269fe7","67c4a0dd-5f32-4dde-b733-4a4a9e5dfafb","6901ef7b-f98a-4b3a-b622-85196fe10ffb","696bb9a6-aa69-4de4-a566-5df21482bc51","6a44ea24-a3bf-4ad8-96b1-5ae56cefb84c","6ab671c9-310c-4d88-bd88-0251180b2345","6cf864fb-5956-4416-a1c5-f42153e66ec4","6ee56cf3-78f2-4420-bede-08f76397b2fb","706246bb-b5c8-4d73-81fa-2e93d040c762","706f0136-7ae5-45f2-b804-e3a8c9a14d1c","70b9c7ef-3983-40dd-b904-5607537ff37f","71196507-ad87-406f-a4df-edc8a14b1575","73066633-67a8-4240-8c5a-3c4ae29b486d","73369c4a-c44b-4b7a-b3cc-07766ccb4e2a","747400a0-bfad-4fa2-8004-06f237d1c543","75eac450-5d76-45da-975a-a47f1515ca01","75f7eb04-35fe-48ce-af4a-d0ccf3067076","77ed2567-2595-48f0-891b-a753164f2866","7855cb39-b177-4d3b-bd72-0a18afd5415b","79cfeedd-0cef-4026-962d-c86d241c4e56","79f059b8-00b2-4345-ad46-440c7bc371df","7a539249-77a2-4e2b-a29f-6952304d80d7","7a59b547-cf09-4b46-bbfe-d7a7f34b7cfc","7a707681-5edc-461c-b5a8-0057a374f3cc","7b3b345d-0902-4461-a6bc-747c26feb7f2","7c914cb3-8ba1-4768-ac56-a051b75a6e8b","7ddc7283-670a-4dfb-9e38-a11aa0c579c2","8151434e-f600-47a9-93df-16b483e88961","815dcb75-691c-4066-a898-b7ed46fdbdf2","816a43e1-6b33-4a27-a385-9d12dd8e924f","8187d86e-f46c-4e26-8188-a4e7b31de2f6","81b21166-1d16-4aec-910f-b382f9680f5f","81f9e1b1-71fd-45a2-9292-017420336059","8205ac1a-be22-438c-b3e0-f7aa463d3501","824601ea-5309-4ddf-bc61-486c992e309c","835cbabf-d424-4f04-89cb-1d8c0b08f1ab","83bf777b-6ee5-4e82-bd85-6e374853473a","84512e93-e51a-4c89-88dd-ecc2afc0699a","84ea460e-bfc2-4977-aebb-32594a90693b","85680853-3899-4f21-b262-dbe3e8893779","867c2a12-155a-4309-aff0-300c6125824c","86b559ac-3645-468b-9f43-7d961bd255d7","8779026e-22f2-4276-a7b9-695e4e569057","892c7a97-bb6b-47a5-9402-8a5293acf25b","8b1ef2e6-f7a2-4db0-9589-42159cf06574","8d8b9ba9-5da4-4861-89db-348400c8ef68","8e0f3d53-2c44-474d-9787-4713b7050c28","8e4f2f4a-8039-4ba0-9b6d-beecad106136","8eb102f2-a097-496b-8975-3d2cd6e31a8d","8ecfae6d-fb77-4dfe-9f9b-f1425d8a13da","8ef8782e-cc91-4ddc-95d5-d260f1b7a518","905b10d3-5531-40bc-b5e3-84beb79f1af2","91aa9ca8-e7d7-4036-a22f-5c8c8e7fc2ce","920f5e05-04f9-4545-b26d-ea48a1f18a2f","9285d418-e4e3-40a1-b1d1-da857748bfd3","92b301e8-97fb-47a7-94a6-b858beb0a1fb","9368fe71-a18d-4580-8063-8e3f17e6cec9","9379cea2-647c-459b-af54-770e31e9bbe1","93c87fee-61ec-4ea8-bd4f-3434669835ee","93ec7040-a06c-4da5-b0b1-626399456a8a","944709d1-19c5-461e-a509-d35f5314cc8e","946d9238-09b9-474e-8481-5e734cedca7a","948eda84-20a8-442d-8a0a-ffba051904a4","94d114b9-3c47-468e-8714-ed449f90e8e4","94faca18-b471-4748-8bab-f399641cedbd","95044e07-ad37-43f6-95b0-cebe1e9f8ce0","95b8351c-9ddb-457d-9035-ad3b6d181dc7","96621df7-0c9b-41e5-a5a6-3f21a24613d5","97c9d44f-1ca4-489d-a786-dc23f1fe1175","980db746-8492-4784-ab7e-f6c3b10378e1","9849e210-d94b-448b-885e-7bdffe11cfe9","9bd6a50e-945d-42d4-88de-97e83b4c3b06","9c74f902-2ef0-4269-b436-acc19aa11ea5","9c81b00b-87e1-4cce-bfc8-9583b3b8a234","9cbf8104-4fa2-4365-bc32-09eb2d1c9381","9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","9d92713b-a9c4-4b7e-87f4-c4fd443e38b5","9f454843-a34c-4619-a576-493f835993b4","9fe3b91d-3719-4260-926a-d5711bd1efc4","a06cd968-9dc5-42c5-a6e8-3d3c36dfc8c2","a18ba308-f8ab-4590-b466-daf80aa2b59c","a3aeeb23-ea47-454e-9079-05e2142e157d","a3ce7cd2-ee71-42ce-b4f7-96a81c6bd295","a45c3495-d077-4241-b1d7-72fa109d0e6b","a6385d09-ca9d-4f95-b5ba-4f50630bec35","a7002128-c4bc-48cd-bed1-46a529e69132","a7cc57e8-71f7-4536-ba7c-452e09344a18","a96905fe-9d68-4a0c-9c4e-ce250411fcd9","a9c15856-f188-45d4-80a8-7929118af59a","aa57f0d8-8cb4-4c4c-8ef4-4c4acdef25e4","ab7d0ab2-d774-415c-bd3f-a606f92ef3c3","abb94f1c-6bf3-442d-9749-eacc170b025c","ac5e071a-48a2-4a53-a1f6-5fc7b6d35280","adad636e-6844-49cb-bb07-54ff4f1a044f","adfa4015-b34e-4488-99e4-b20b4dc10324","aec84261-126b-4386-b0f4-15f160ca67ae","aed9cf49-b6d3-4952-8acb-37e1eae1c31a","b26721cc-ba4b-460e-a726-17bebda4c82e","b293dea5-f7e1-4889-a56d-f823569cdff4","b3e58970-8bf0-4e37-a8f9-dd4fce60bf46","b40ee428-0e50-4a51-aca9-a9074c0486cf","b4a8aa1a-7262-4318-9579-9fff20f959a6","b4b614f7-a43d-4e57-9766-25f7fef90d68","b556af30-b2db-4273-8b3b-a5b1ec113ebb","b5940660-7f58-4123-bb25-6f78d4e1694d","b6a4c3c9-311e-4a4f-beaf-d0012bbfbf51","b77861f3-9e86-4450-a13f-4522abb6a8ef","b78601e1-6600-408f-bc8c-52407a676ecb","b8eebc63-ef4e-4144-9327-420f594806c6","bcd183c8-344e-4cb8-8561-8c2e6a027897","bdc8358e-29a2-4efa-a99e-6023a27df35b","bf5cf44c-c3df-4c9c-b13b-8a0108b8a106","c0981bc0-6d81-46d5-a2fc-715c6a5662b8","c2875090-e4c1-4cec-be8a-7218c8774f6b","c349f006-e1f4-498e-970a-626a724e2231","c3aa82e4-0707-4514-a535-22d6d4a7f0b2","c51ad2dc-5440-4692-bdac-73968c6ad4d2","c5597192-fe4a-479a-8bf7-cdcf15d74d10","c66f7c07-f922-4abd-8805-71a0fade560f","c6dcef79-69bf-47eb-a0b5-7b4d6bef00fc","c6e1c64f-1094-4a24-9d3e-8103fb4d94ab","c6e6e3f3-bc85-48dc-ad18-bb08d31d7308","c7af7c66-9a6d-42c8-8695-bcd164ed856b","c8ddee14-df38-49aa-9d85-a7c6b34273a6","caae3943-065a-475a-a6fe-f5706ce3db97","cbdf7850-c12b-44e7-9a2a-2e88994f389f","cd235f2c-1119-4002-b756-61e2983b0232","cddf4a6a-4d4e-4d8b-9631-734b807f7215","ce0c52be-896a-479c-b92b-09bf3518d332","cf1f664f-fab8-46ef-9768-c3fc897d3913","cf35dad3-c846-4c5e-91db-577efd256f78","cfa001c3-f0fc-45cd-8a71-3e35d2026e1f","cfd3be60-c380-4a63-8e12-5fd8af9b72bd","d11fa038-1162-4d93-9df5-6d5b35b8628b","d156577c-5001-4f1b-90f7-d7b21a37497b","d18985ea-8239-498e-9147-eda1d0bb8bde","d20d6d55-e1d9-462f-902a-31987fc17f06","d2c92cf6-2a73-4e89-adff-db3cb523f8e1","d2f303e3-c25c-412f-8ae4-4ec525f68736","d301dc8a-7194-46ad-bf04-43efdc78c053","d315d00d-a3eb-4c0f-9554-c1395585910f","d3c6617c-2925-40b2-aa72-9b0b6c5e83d4","d405b9b8-3fd3-4230-a3d3-ccdd34abd185","d5ff3294-0ecd-48eb-b9dd-a2c0282a055a","d6f9dd1e-cee9-48ff-a7e7-71d7a7b8f61d","d7c49d74-0c9c-470b-94ad-c7ccaa111eaf","d7f7d93d-fda2-48cd-89a3-7b5c35ec6480","d96f8ae8-4753-4f7b-9ec5-3238eca05841","dab486f0-dfe1-46a8-b0d8-32e2a200b8e8","db8eb9e3-f6e6-4be4-b6d2-d135a6c3e9ac","dc0f107c-d6af-40f2-b8fd-d6a8264071a5","dc9b6179-78d1-4eec-9df7-47aadc6c4002","dd99547d-81d1-4764-ba78-52a1cddf906d","ddada193-97b9-4ccc-8a51-bfbea77a0c06","df6dd614-6785-4c3a-b6c7-1e091a751c64","e06bafea-36a4-40ac-8e47-2a2619fd46fd","e1083f09-5ed1-4bdf-8ac5-3c65482b8e5f","e1955bc5-123d-4ca0-b875-2d75b1f718f1","e1bbca7c-14db-40cf-a128-0219f12466a3","e256486b-ee32-4d0f-9cba-d02bf4bd780a","e27aa94c-fa47-4a58-bc17-1e5d3387b739","e2a4561f-b8bf-4ca9-9990-3b885eaf5c2b","e2f38cc3-06ff-4db2-8aad-a537c1e1d0c8","e446ef0a-2a74-42bf-bcd6-2b793506650e","e4aba04c-81ff-438c-a506-881ff2436c82","e500f58c-3afd-4143-b4d2-f60500bf9023","e53f3cca-ca53-449c-9f09-737f317fb169","e57d61a5-e3ec-423d-ad96-243fbfae502b","e6d36e44-00e2-4f9e-95b1-e892e44117eb","e6e7e00b-0ede-4741-8419-066a93e431cd","e6f33250-4650-42ce-96e8-87ce7eebc853","e70df749-9305-44b3-8a30-defc332a7fa4","e8fbbd18-0c64-4437-9ea9-4b4877081943","e9029bad-f0af-4178-8545-61b8bf20d98f","ea0bba2c-7a56-40f2-afac-00f638b54fc3","ea27969f-7a0b-4e5c-9893-7763d5fdbfbf","ea51c75b-4b85-48fb-bbb7-8fde23c110aa","ea6c8861-7a39-4e19-8e71-58720131fa8d","eb7f5240-b11f-4c58-9681-91c05d2c3f50","eb84cbb3-24d1-4565-9ec1-8bd3b9d4bec9","ec990258-7999-4c93-81af-59b6ab2c65df","ed2c35d4-102a-4b73-8382-2ac35610faed","edf6b48c-90dc-4757-814e-999556997808","ef391115-fde1-44aa-ab00-abb8e2e7ec82","efb7c5ac-4ac5-4964-80cb-f95ebaa0e04c","f0a80593-3eca-497d-afa0-90d16a414e1d","f121b53e-c2bd-4ce5-878c-fd5a64863273","f1307eae-cbfb-4f04-b6cc-3facd9e296d6","f19a484a-77bd-4389-8266-523228328091","f1ba13f7-7414-47ce-9df3-a6aa0902c1b9","f24f8cd0-0ca1-49cf-8cf1-4a5e6b938fe3","f25f2d19-18b4-4e7e-ad7b-8f30a193b3d6","f267ac1f-eff8-417a-8920-f8d37e384f79","f289c668-0c40-41e6-82af-ae6829b262d4","f319102d-533a-41ff-9f08-6bda6778bb7e","f40851bc-e6e8-4605-ba83-f44d932b4760","f4c53608-9890-4b9f-89a3-7c1028bc1e05","f502d85e-d523-4b8c-9dec-469aa08204df","f5653eaf-7d13-4c91-93c7-e30daca2ec3a","f5876a8c-263e-4134-a5b2-ba2453ed9080","f58af8d2-a271-4586-b2b4-1b399c9f84de","f5c77efa-f72b-424c-a810-81cd552ba3de","f62defd3-7975-4edf-8f34-40a36b487ac8","f75dd4aa-d0bc-4078-857d-76a41f9df08f","f9720bd0-18fb-4774-96e6-eca25490f73e","fa1e38b4-4ced-4f4b-9a7b-b1b89ff13da7","fa93085f-260f-4f91-af1c-c85c03ca06fa","fb4d21e7-be93-4775-905f-977427db28c4","fc91133d-e4b6-4458-8d6c-cb1af7bcd97e","fdc662ec-5ed7-4d04-8993-6144ff01abc2","fe4e9bc0-2802-4dd8-97e4-27704fad2a1b","fec4e8d2-6a2f-4046-b9d4-85a831f76655","fee252e0-d871-44c1-8917-1fd2d148377a","ff092982-3b6e-4f4c-8194-6b8201ee1246","ff4c3069-118e-4f08-aa39-6394130a8ec4","oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-055a850c7fce9512","oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-081117bbf714a215","oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-13fd5c31e278a577","oil-156fd0980ec51fe6","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-23d97461886d2622","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-42c4efcdce45e35d","oil-438415c185832786","oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-4b88eb2520f8cc22","oil-4bd4c6831e9c7077","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-5413f17944743156","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-63426d939d718e7f","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-7ced813eb9eb1314","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-846611108e27fafb","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-86a403aef71f924e","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-a0831d014f72baf3","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","oil-c2fa50179af284f7","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-c94e003c369b3450","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-ce4031737a7654b3","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-d276b566dce62194","oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f1693a0670f7b784","oil-f5b6386895404f0b","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-fc5474312cf8529f","oil-fc714f38909e4348","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9","oil-ff34df409a4806f1"],"entries":[{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:food-composition-and-adulteration:fflo-hasadulterant","name":"fflo:hasAdulterant","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":998,"article_count":357,"event_count":357,"article_ids":["0109eea0-3adc-4177-a6f7-e3bc31bf237d","030df41e-ccfc-4023-a026-89cc92bf3253","03ea9124-befd-4983-bcdc-147e3ed3bf73","04c00967-a247-4802-b3c2-3f266885c385","05937ca4-de64-422f-ba56-878f6152027c","0932679a-fe82-4a1e-949e-9d4fd17ed2a0","0a113e2a-26d3-45e4-9064-7cfa2f39230b","0a342064-5378-4aff-b4aa-34ae5c1ab66b","0aa842b8-1ac9-4243-a8b6-5d98d32d6089","0af3703f-23ec-4f8f-a1b6-45b4adb68b12","0b5a50e0-df3b-42ea-83c6-80bc16cf39fb","0d14295d-a954-4163-8974-ecb51bd464e8","0d96e6b1-57f6-4555-8711-703a6c818eea","0e464dfa-d504-4806-9005-c1ba38758bf8","0ea7c6a7-d2c1-498f-aa00-f3fc942206ed","0ef4d3e4-844c-47ee-a430-8f171ec4c000","0f7493be-b335-4851-9029-9e87ba0da155","102a4953-33a2-4842-827e-987e3bb6ce7a","141518ef-ce68-4969-bb2a-66f56733fab2","164f43df-a069-4197-9854-e7bd9fc78fae","178d6244-50cd-4bea-8e16-f951f6227a8c","18f4411e-1d84-42c5-835a-97436ad30c7c","1933f8f5-8812-4e24-85bd-cdbdc83f929e","1a066d87-0093-4ca8-9c10-84c004b76c48","1a806023-ac1d-4da2-924e-25821c2554f5","1a87f314-ec7e-4407-96f2-0995e8d26fc0","1ae756d4-675e-4a08-bc7d-ba6a3e922d5d","1b1069d2-3f50-4dd3-a8bd-0aeed6bacf98","1bb0d3e5-6f04-4d91-a899-8b6f59bc228a","1c7ea343-020a-4266-9854-b12ebfa2cf50","1c8fe57c-2cee-4f73-a5f3-6ee4051024e7","1de4a13b-1497-421e-b5bc-a8ebbc7a3b18","1df33743-1016-49ce-981b-862125c0893f","1e6b9f5b-a065-4242-ae58-1f105455955f","1fe9639d-5c39-472e-94a7-73ac2b03bfce","2010c6e2-c9cb-4a3e-b22b-8cabf1044074","2013c452-d1c8-41a0-abea-92e26d231790","21fb2b00-9b86-4924-9a0d-248f976cfd93","22261df7-8974-447f-a1cf-192c59528f64","2255e304-d6ef-4707-b594-cbc3955019ec","229a7f40-f956-476e-8c84-3fd9ed3d6c29","23a5dd2a-a53c-44b8-8b86-37e04d4cf1ee","2499d49c-748f-41d8-84d9-eed7a66ad43a","2679a7a3-abde-4979-ac6e-5cf24113e0db","26ac5726-fd69-42b8-a80e-6a71b91ba466","26b11917-4e55-41d5-aeb1-64e8b44bedba","28a03096-e60c-4adb-b4fa-55f0bd28a95d","292b562c-132b-47cc-9030-d2544e801e7e","29a173b3-4587-4257-9c93-2f0c483079c5","2ad1f047-985c-4c59-aa13-749fa75bcba9","2b442757-da6a-46e5-ae37-b083e00062d3","2c075e82-3fe3-4b95-a68a-f0fad41e51f5","2d8a95d1-8554-4194-b427-4239c3f9ad5b","2fc5c9f1-64d2-498f-8f7a-96d94b926f6d","2fede3c0-46a7-46e8-a776-5a6fd6d3f08e","301bb818-ff44-4346-9ffe-ad58bf13cfb2","31cae76c-aa62-4328-bd40-368275f60e9f","31f1f824-c698-4b97-a52a-1a1136a9ac6e","32bc8e29-1313-4d9b-86ff-8c3bb665f057","33326887-4ed0-4562-a0ac-b889d6ad53a9","336a89c4-d98a-4242-8803-4d479689bc4d","3401730f-3850-4c7d-884f-dcdb1d086c42","3624ed70-d464-4caa-9b4e-4dfc2ed435dc","368930a7-2085-43bd-bb79-62d471c9e75c","36a70fc6-de5a-494c-9dc5-801fe7a7a53d","3797cfc4-05a5-422b-b823-ed3bb850f540","3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","3865528e-cbb8-4615-af7d-f9ab01e9fe4d","38d24327-d93d-472b-99ac-246351c7dbfd","394a5ff5-76f3-4885-87ed-4a6879611c22","3c0e9d23-f858-47eb-8e7a-23db1d42822a","3cdd0ffb-841b-4883-9b1a-df7b28022554","3d6b98eb-c79e-460c-883b-9c997ffea009","3f674523-5416-4b89-8cab-fe3ddf3c9e7e","411b1d1a-7b18-4425-90f0-da2c296625eb","4216dab3-b436-422a-a6ee-74b5858f7aa2","4260e03f-c3cd-480c-827c-7ebe3a09e913","4299b01d-c5ab-4283-ae2d-31aa1fdbbfec","432f2c6e-3092-44cd-bf1b-54249b31ad6b","43de8661-2844-46b7-bb39-15eb17f6b82e","445ff19b-5429-4a55-be3f-c4b03481b04f","4469e268-1b01-49b7-a436-ea4a88ba6269","45fdd40d-5bc4-4fe7-9eb9-883c55f14a70","471bc3da-bbd4-417c-875a-595a713be7fd","473ed916-1979-4222-b1e8-38d39c51fe03","47635cd8-696c-4adf-94ed-338f084a3d62","484a6113-0a95-4624-8291-c00710260e4d","4974f73f-37bc-4300-8d31-d97ca337365b","4a021f95-539e-4217-98a0-d651be9a3b47","4a638904-2bcf-4037-8afd-ec6e5b0b6b11","4c67d899-fab5-4e78-9274-526d6a4fe0bb","4cd73621-691c-4866-91c1-0b99d0d1a89a","4d7063c6-5201-4ce1-89ed-75ee21d51b98","4eb18b90-e310-48db-9531-68b146420749","4f3026f8-7217-4bf9-af6e-71bcad8bb1c5","4fa075c9-a30f-47e5-8f09-158017bfd6d6","502ff9a1-ac00-4ef2-96cb-0a0614085766","508d009a-650f-4e40-b03d-ebef9d2c069e","5118358f-2777-4bfd-a761-adb4bc1da763","51a534c1-9193-4b8c-bbd2-b4e368930ead","5245dc0a-5d68-4a00-ad89-6255f3bee930","5374dadc-cd7f-41df-b8d9-8ef7c10ec693","53f8ec9a-900f-481f-bfb5-a6ca452416ed","54637d34-f16e-4e98-84c1-681a0fca559c","54686005-b842-4cc5-82b1-0276e36a42b6","550bda80-b5be-488a-89f6-64b9698b4033","554708da-6872-4a1b-91cc-3beeb59fbf2e","55552c00-e696-4ac2-951e-156364cb1337","5710a503-9fbe-46ae-abd5-2663069b70db","57b2326c-e877-4995-82fc-221eda139718","5804b97c-c416-49d1-9fbd-5bb52c0595dd","58ac029e-4204-42c4-8ff3-6dbd84dd382a","58c8e8bf-9cbd-46dd-8a8b-b1b5cbb0d58d","5a7bde0b-59e0-4f86-9b63-2bbebb593d41","5c86116b-5fae-45a9-b467-01fc8b26a166","5d222c9b-8733-4d3b-abaa-59f77da35546","5fa4530c-d60b-48c1-b6b2-371abff6d77a","60ccacb1-7c41-4259-b651-bfbf60e7b53a","6135126e-45b3-4fe7-a80f-82248b08ea7b","620bfde0-ec72-4b52-bfa4-e06ce3b56960","64902247-dbff-448d-987f-c89ac2e30538","66bb816a-1961-4e45-8460-9328304c7956","6721b632-2b4f-492a-840d-bb05d2a9f1af","672ecfdb-cb9d-485d-8fc1-76e6a8269fe7","67c4a0dd-5f32-4dde-b733-4a4a9e5dfafb","6901ef7b-f98a-4b3a-b622-85196fe10ffb","696bb9a6-aa69-4de4-a566-5df21482bc51","6ab671c9-310c-4d88-bd88-0251180b2345","6cf864fb-5956-4416-a1c5-f42153e66ec4","6ee56cf3-78f2-4420-bede-08f76397b2fb","706f0136-7ae5-45f2-b804-e3a8c9a14d1c","70b9c7ef-3983-40dd-b904-5607537ff37f","71196507-ad87-406f-a4df-edc8a14b1575","73066633-67a8-4240-8c5a-3c4ae29b486d","73369c4a-c44b-4b7a-b3cc-07766ccb4e2a","747400a0-bfad-4fa2-8004-06f237d1c543","75eac450-5d76-45da-975a-a47f1515ca01","7855cb39-b177-4d3b-bd72-0a18afd5415b","79cfeedd-0cef-4026-962d-c86d241c4e56","79f059b8-00b2-4345-ad46-440c7bc371df","7a539249-77a2-4e2b-a29f-6952304d80d7","7a59b547-cf09-4b46-bbfe-d7a7f34b7cfc","7a707681-5edc-461c-b5a8-0057a374f3cc","7b3b345d-0902-4461-a6bc-747c26feb7f2","7c914cb3-8ba1-4768-ac56-a051b75a6e8b","815dcb75-691c-4066-a898-b7ed46fdbdf2","816a43e1-6b33-4a27-a385-9d12dd8e924f","8187d86e-f46c-4e26-8188-a4e7b31de2f6","81b21166-1d16-4aec-910f-b382f9680f5f","81f9e1b1-71fd-45a2-9292-017420336059","824601ea-5309-4ddf-bc61-486c992e309c","835cbabf-d424-4f04-89cb-1d8c0b08f1ab","83bf777b-6ee5-4e82-bd85-6e374853473a","84512e93-e51a-4c89-88dd-ecc2afc0699a","84ea460e-bfc2-4977-aebb-32594a90693b","85680853-3899-4f21-b262-dbe3e8893779","867c2a12-155a-4309-aff0-300c6125824c","8779026e-22f2-4276-a7b9-695e4e569057","892c7a97-bb6b-47a5-9402-8a5293acf25b","8b1ef2e6-f7a2-4db0-9589-42159cf06574","8d8b9ba9-5da4-4861-89db-348400c8ef68","8e0f3d53-2c44-474d-9787-4713b7050c28","8e4f2f4a-8039-4ba0-9b6d-beecad106136","8eb102f2-a097-496b-8975-3d2cd6e31a8d","8ecfae6d-fb77-4dfe-9f9b-f1425d8a13da","8ef8782e-cc91-4ddc-95d5-d260f1b7a518","905b10d3-5531-40bc-b5e3-84beb79f1af2","91aa9ca8-e7d7-4036-a22f-5c8c8e7fc2ce","920f5e05-04f9-4545-b26d-ea48a1f18a2f","9285d418-e4e3-40a1-b1d1-da857748bfd3","92b301e8-97fb-47a7-94a6-b858beb0a1fb","9368fe71-a18d-4580-8063-8e3f17e6cec9","93c87fee-61ec-4ea8-bd4f-3434669835ee","93ec7040-a06c-4da5-b0b1-626399456a8a","944709d1-19c5-461e-a509-d35f5314cc8e","94d114b9-3c47-468e-8714-ed449f90e8e4","94faca18-b471-4748-8bab-f399641cedbd","95b8351c-9ddb-457d-9035-ad3b6d181dc7","96621df7-0c9b-41e5-a5a6-3f21a24613d5","97c9d44f-1ca4-489d-a786-dc23f1fe1175","980db746-8492-4784-ab7e-f6c3b10378e1","9849e210-d94b-448b-885e-7bdffe11cfe9","9bd6a50e-945d-42d4-88de-97e83b4c3b06","9c74f902-2ef0-4269-b436-acc19aa11ea5","9cbf8104-4fa2-4365-bc32-09eb2d1c9381","9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","9d92713b-a9c4-4b7e-87f4-c4fd443e38b5","9fe3b91d-3719-4260-926a-d5711bd1efc4","a18ba308-f8ab-4590-b466-daf80aa2b59c","a3aeeb23-ea47-454e-9079-05e2142e157d","a3ce7cd2-ee71-42ce-b4f7-96a81c6bd295","a45c3495-d077-4241-b1d7-72fa109d0e6b","a6385d09-ca9d-4f95-b5ba-4f50630bec35","a7cc57e8-71f7-4536-ba7c-452e09344a18","a96905fe-9d68-4a0c-9c4e-ce250411fcd9","a9c15856-f188-45d4-80a8-7929118af59a","aa57f0d8-8cb4-4c4c-8ef4-4c4acdef25e4","ab7d0ab2-d774-415c-bd3f-a606f92ef3c3","abb94f1c-6bf3-442d-9749-eacc170b025c","ac5e071a-48a2-4a53-a1f6-5fc7b6d35280","adad636e-6844-49cb-bb07-54ff4f1a044f","adfa4015-b34e-4488-99e4-b20b4dc10324","aed9cf49-b6d3-4952-8acb-37e1eae1c31a","b26721cc-ba4b-460e-a726-17bebda4c82e","b293dea5-f7e1-4889-a56d-f823569cdff4","b3e58970-8bf0-4e37-a8f9-dd4fce60bf46","b40ee428-0e50-4a51-aca9-a9074c0486cf","b4b614f7-a43d-4e57-9766-25f7fef90d68","b556af30-b2db-4273-8b3b-a5b1ec113ebb","b5940660-7f58-4123-bb25-6f78d4e1694d","b6a4c3c9-311e-4a4f-beaf-d0012bbfbf51","b77861f3-9e86-4450-a13f-4522abb6a8ef","b78601e1-6600-408f-bc8c-52407a676ecb","b8eebc63-ef4e-4144-9327-420f594806c6","bcd183c8-344e-4cb8-8561-8c2e6a027897","bdc8358e-29a2-4efa-a99e-6023a27df35b","bf5cf44c-c3df-4c9c-b13b-8a0108b8a106","c0981bc0-6d81-46d5-a2fc-715c6a5662b8","c2875090-e4c1-4cec-be8a-7218c8774f6b","c349f006-e1f4-498e-970a-626a724e2231","c3aa82e4-0707-4514-a535-22d6d4a7f0b2","c51ad2dc-5440-4692-bdac-73968c6ad4d2","c5597192-fe4a-479a-8bf7-cdcf15d74d10","c66f7c07-f922-4abd-8805-71a0fade560f","c6dcef79-69bf-47eb-a0b5-7b4d6bef00fc","c6e6e3f3-bc85-48dc-ad18-bb08d31d7308","c7af7c66-9a6d-42c8-8695-bcd164ed856b","c8ddee14-df38-49aa-9d85-a7c6b34273a6","caae3943-065a-475a-a6fe-f5706ce3db97","cbdf7850-c12b-44e7-9a2a-2e88994f389f","cd235f2c-1119-4002-b756-61e2983b0232","cddf4a6a-4d4e-4d8b-9631-734b807f7215","ce0c52be-896a-479c-b92b-09bf3518d332","cfa001c3-f0fc-45cd-8a71-3e35d2026e1f","d11fa038-1162-4d93-9df5-6d5b35b8628b","d156577c-5001-4f1b-90f7-d7b21a37497b","d18985ea-8239-498e-9147-eda1d0bb8bde","d20d6d55-e1d9-462f-902a-31987fc17f06","d2c92cf6-2a73-4e89-adff-db3cb523f8e1","d2f303e3-c25c-412f-8ae4-4ec525f68736","d315d00d-a3eb-4c0f-9554-c1395585910f","d405b9b8-3fd3-4230-a3d3-ccdd34abd185","d5ff3294-0ecd-48eb-b9dd-a2c0282a055a","d6f9dd1e-cee9-48ff-a7e7-71d7a7b8f61d","d7c49d74-0c9c-470b-94ad-c7ccaa111eaf","d7f7d93d-fda2-48cd-89a3-7b5c35ec6480","d96f8ae8-4753-4f7b-9ec5-3238eca05841","dab486f0-dfe1-46a8-b0d8-32e2a200b8e8","db8eb9e3-f6e6-4be4-b6d2-d135a6c3e9ac","dc0f107c-d6af-40f2-b8fd-d6a8264071a5","dd99547d-81d1-4764-ba78-52a1cddf906d","ddada193-97b9-4ccc-8a51-bfbea77a0c06","df6dd614-6785-4c3a-b6c7-1e091a751c64","e06bafea-36a4-40ac-8e47-2a2619fd46fd","e1955bc5-123d-4ca0-b875-2d75b1f718f1","e1bbca7c-14db-40cf-a128-0219f12466a3","e256486b-ee32-4d0f-9cba-d02bf4bd780a","e27aa94c-fa47-4a58-bc17-1e5d3387b739","e2a4561f-b8bf-4ca9-9990-3b885eaf5c2b","e2f38cc3-06ff-4db2-8aad-a537c1e1d0c8","e4aba04c-81ff-438c-a506-881ff2436c82","e500f58c-3afd-4143-b4d2-f60500bf9023","e53f3cca-ca53-449c-9f09-737f317fb169","e57d61a5-e3ec-423d-ad96-243fbfae502b","e6d36e44-00e2-4f9e-95b1-e892e44117eb","e6e7e00b-0ede-4741-8419-066a93e431cd","e6f33250-4650-42ce-96e8-87ce7eebc853","e70df749-9305-44b3-8a30-defc332a7fa4","e8fbbd18-0c64-4437-9ea9-4b4877081943","e9029bad-f0af-4178-8545-61b8bf20d98f","ea0bba2c-7a56-40f2-afac-00f638b54fc3","ea27969f-7a0b-4e5c-9893-7763d5fdbfbf","ea51c75b-4b85-48fb-bbb7-8fde23c110aa","ea6c8861-7a39-4e19-8e71-58720131fa8d","eb7f5240-b11f-4c58-9681-91c05d2c3f50","eb84cbb3-24d1-4565-9ec1-8bd3b9d4bec9","ed2c35d4-102a-4b73-8382-2ac35610faed","ef391115-fde1-44aa-ab00-abb8e2e7ec82","efb7c5ac-4ac5-4964-80cb-f95ebaa0e04c","f0a80593-3eca-497d-afa0-90d16a414e1d","f1307eae-cbfb-4f04-b6cc-3facd9e296d6","f19a484a-77bd-4389-8266-523228328091","f1ba13f7-7414-47ce-9df3-a6aa0902c1b9","f24f8cd0-0ca1-49cf-8cf1-4a5e6b938fe3","f25f2d19-18b4-4e7e-ad7b-8f30a193b3d6","f267ac1f-eff8-417a-8920-f8d37e384f79","f289c668-0c40-41e6-82af-ae6829b262d4","f319102d-533a-41ff-9f08-6bda6778bb7e","f40851bc-e6e8-4605-ba83-f44d932b4760","f4c53608-9890-4b9f-89a3-7c1028bc1e05","f502d85e-d523-4b8c-9dec-469aa08204df","f5876a8c-263e-4134-a5b2-ba2453ed9080","f58af8d2-a271-4586-b2b4-1b399c9f84de","f5c77efa-f72b-424c-a810-81cd552ba3de","f75dd4aa-d0bc-4078-857d-76a41f9df08f","fa1e38b4-4ced-4f4b-9a7b-b1b89ff13da7","fa93085f-260f-4f91-af1c-c85c03ca06fa","fb4d21e7-be93-4775-905f-977427db28c4","fc91133d-e4b6-4458-8d6c-cb1af7bcd97e","fdc662ec-5ed7-4d04-8993-6144ff01abc2","fe4e9bc0-2802-4dd8-97e4-27704fad2a1b","fec4e8d2-6a2f-4046-b9d4-85a831f76655","fee252e0-d871-44c1-8917-1fd2d148377a","ff092982-3b6e-4f4c-8194-6b8201ee1246","ff4c3069-118e-4f08-aa39-6394130a8ec4","oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-081117bbf714a215","oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-13fd5c31e278a577","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-438415c185832786","oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-63426d939d718e7f","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-7ced813eb9eb1314","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-846611108e27fafb","oil-86a403aef71f924e","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","oil-c2fa50179af284f7","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-ce4031737a7654b3","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-d276b566dce62194","oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba","oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-f5b6386895404f0b","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-fc5474312cf8529f","oil-fc714f38909e4348","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9","oil-ff34df409a4806f1"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:hasAdulterant"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:food-composition-and-adulteration:fflo-hasfraudtype","name":"fflo:hasFraudType","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":218,"article_count":147,"event_count":147,"article_ids":["0932679a-fe82-4a1e-949e-9d4fd17ed2a0","0d14295d-a954-4163-8974-ecb51bd464e8","0e518ac8-dc53-4c79-938a-bd26c1142eeb","0ef4d3e4-844c-47ee-a430-8f171ec4c000","0facca96-d90c-4f21-ba98-356f7f6b1622","102a4953-33a2-4842-827e-987e3bb6ce7a","10f36230-190b-4b13-8cfc-8d12c2f37080","1a066d87-0093-4ca8-9c10-84c004b76c48","1c8fe57c-2cee-4f73-a5f3-6ee4051024e7","1df33743-1016-49ce-981b-862125c0893f","2013c452-d1c8-41a0-abea-92e26d231790","21fb2b00-9b86-4924-9a0d-248f976cfd93","2255e304-d6ef-4707-b594-cbc3955019ec","229a7f40-f956-476e-8c84-3fd9ed3d6c29","255ac21d-c17e-4926-9dad-13db7698ed72","2679a7a3-abde-4979-ac6e-5cf24113e0db","2ad1f047-985c-4c59-aa13-749fa75bcba9","2c075e82-3fe3-4b95-a68a-f0fad41e51f5","2d8a95d1-8554-4194-b427-4239c3f9ad5b","2fc5c9f1-64d2-498f-8f7a-96d94b926f6d","301bb818-ff44-4346-9ffe-ad58bf13cfb2","31f1f824-c698-4b97-a52a-1a1136a9ac6e","3278338f-1fa0-4045-9701-e237d5ad0930","33326887-4ed0-4562-a0ac-b889d6ad53a9","336a89c4-d98a-4242-8803-4d479689bc4d","34dc1c1f-d12c-4230-bb1c-e41b6961f288","368930a7-2085-43bd-bb79-62d471c9e75c","36a70fc6-de5a-494c-9dc5-801fe7a7a53d","3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","39a9fb26-817d-404e-a150-4e4c5ebc037c","3c0e9d23-f858-47eb-8e7a-23db1d42822a","3d6b98eb-c79e-460c-883b-9c997ffea009","3e325b99-7611-4f89-8963-7f79c5ac4105","411b1d1a-7b18-4425-90f0-da2c296625eb","4260e03f-c3cd-480c-827c-7ebe3a09e913","43de8661-2844-46b7-bb39-15eb17f6b82e","473ed916-1979-4222-b1e8-38d39c51fe03","4a021f95-539e-4217-98a0-d651be9a3b47","4a638904-2bcf-4037-8afd-ec6e5b0b6b11","4cd73621-691c-4866-91c1-0b99d0d1a89a","4d7063c6-5201-4ce1-89ed-75ee21d51b98","4f3026f8-7217-4bf9-af6e-71bcad8bb1c5","4fa075c9-a30f-47e5-8f09-158017bfd6d6","502ff9a1-ac00-4ef2-96cb-0a0614085766","54637d34-f16e-4e98-84c1-681a0fca559c","58c8e8bf-9cbd-46dd-8a8b-b1b5cbb0d58d","5a7bde0b-59e0-4f86-9b63-2bbebb593d41","5d222c9b-8733-4d3b-abaa-59f77da35546","620bfde0-ec72-4b52-bfa4-e06ce3b56960","634a0a0f-0899-427f-9396-6cc3c5442643","64902247-dbff-448d-987f-c89ac2e30538","696bb9a6-aa69-4de4-a566-5df21482bc51","6a44ea24-a3bf-4ad8-96b1-5ae56cefb84c","7a59b547-cf09-4b46-bbfe-d7a7f34b7cfc","7ddc7283-670a-4dfb-9e38-a11aa0c579c2","815dcb75-691c-4066-a898-b7ed46fdbdf2","835cbabf-d424-4f04-89cb-1d8c0b08f1ab","86b559ac-3645-468b-9f43-7d961bd255d7","892c7a97-bb6b-47a5-9402-8a5293acf25b","905b10d3-5531-40bc-b5e3-84beb79f1af2","9285d418-e4e3-40a1-b1d1-da857748bfd3","944709d1-19c5-461e-a509-d35f5314cc8e","948eda84-20a8-442d-8a0a-ffba051904a4","97c9d44f-1ca4-489d-a786-dc23f1fe1175","980db746-8492-4784-ab7e-f6c3b10378e1","9849e210-d94b-448b-885e-7bdffe11cfe9","9c74f902-2ef0-4269-b436-acc19aa11ea5","9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","9f454843-a34c-4619-a576-493f835993b4","a06cd968-9dc5-42c5-a6e8-3d3c36dfc8c2","a3ce7cd2-ee71-42ce-b4f7-96a81c6bd295","a45c3495-d077-4241-b1d7-72fa109d0e6b","ab7d0ab2-d774-415c-bd3f-a606f92ef3c3","b3e58970-8bf0-4e37-a8f9-dd4fce60bf46","b4a8aa1a-7262-4318-9579-9fff20f959a6","b4b614f7-a43d-4e57-9766-25f7fef90d68","b556af30-b2db-4273-8b3b-a5b1ec113ebb","b5940660-7f58-4123-bb25-6f78d4e1694d","c0981bc0-6d81-46d5-a2fc-715c6a5662b8","c2875090-e4c1-4cec-be8a-7218c8774f6b","c6e6e3f3-bc85-48dc-ad18-bb08d31d7308","c7af7c66-9a6d-42c8-8695-bcd164ed856b","cd235f2c-1119-4002-b756-61e2983b0232","cfa001c3-f0fc-45cd-8a71-3e35d2026e1f","cfd3be60-c380-4a63-8e12-5fd8af9b72bd","d301dc8a-7194-46ad-bf04-43efdc78c053","d3c6617c-2925-40b2-aa72-9b0b6c5e83d4","d6f9dd1e-cee9-48ff-a7e7-71d7a7b8f61d","d96f8ae8-4753-4f7b-9ec5-3238eca05841","dc0f107c-d6af-40f2-b8fd-d6a8264071a5","dd99547d-81d1-4764-ba78-52a1cddf906d","e06bafea-36a4-40ac-8e47-2a2619fd46fd","e1083f09-5ed1-4bdf-8ac5-3c65482b8e5f","e1bbca7c-14db-40cf-a128-0219f12466a3","e27aa94c-fa47-4a58-bc17-1e5d3387b739","e500f58c-3afd-4143-b4d2-f60500bf9023","ea51c75b-4b85-48fb-bbb7-8fde23c110aa","ea6c8861-7a39-4e19-8e71-58720131fa8d","eb7f5240-b11f-4c58-9681-91c05d2c3f50","ec990258-7999-4c93-81af-59b6ab2c65df","ed2c35d4-102a-4b73-8382-2ac35610faed","edf6b48c-90dc-4757-814e-999556997808","f1307eae-cbfb-4f04-b6cc-3facd9e296d6","f1ba13f7-7414-47ce-9df3-a6aa0902c1b9","f24f8cd0-0ca1-49cf-8cf1-4a5e6b938fe3","f25f2d19-18b4-4e7e-ad7b-8f30a193b3d6","f289c668-0c40-41e6-82af-ae6829b262d4","f40851bc-e6e8-4605-ba83-f44d932b4760","f4c53608-9890-4b9f-89a3-7c1028bc1e05","f62defd3-7975-4edf-8f34-40a36b487ac8","f9720bd0-18fb-4774-96e6-eca25490f73e","fa93085f-260f-4f91-af1c-c85c03ca06fa","fdc662ec-5ed7-4d04-8993-6144ff01abc2","ff092982-3b6e-4f4c-8194-6b8201ee1246","oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-156fd0980ec51fe6","oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-4bd4c6831e9c7077","oil-5413f17944743156","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-63426d939d718e7f","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9","oil-ff34df409a4806f1"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:hasFraudType"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:food-composition-and-adulteration:fflo-issubstitutefor","name":"fflo:isSubstituteFor","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":157,"article_count":112,"event_count":112,"article_ids":["04c00967-a247-4802-b3c2-3f266885c385","0a113e2a-26d3-45e4-9064-7cfa2f39230b","0a342064-5378-4aff-b4aa-34ae5c1ab66b","0af3703f-23ec-4f8f-a1b6-45b4adb68b12","0f7493be-b335-4851-9029-9e87ba0da155","0facca96-d90c-4f21-ba98-356f7f6b1622","164f43df-a069-4197-9854-e7bd9fc78fae","1b1069d2-3f50-4dd3-a8bd-0aeed6bacf98","1e6b9f5b-a065-4242-ae58-1f105455955f","2010c6e2-c9cb-4a3e-b22b-8cabf1044074","2719a94d-d523-4fef-bfd9-a1bef16dd951","28a03096-e60c-4adb-b4fa-55f0bd28a95d","2d8a95d1-8554-4194-b427-4239c3f9ad5b","2fe1bef6-e797-4d9f-bb5b-6f936d7a55dc","31cae76c-aa62-4328-bd40-368275f60e9f","31f1f824-c698-4b97-a52a-1a1136a9ac6e","32bc8e29-1313-4d9b-86ff-8c3bb665f057","34b8b88f-e283-46cd-ba6e-f373dc3d4395","34dc1c1f-d12c-4230-bb1c-e41b6961f288","36a70fc6-de5a-494c-9dc5-801fe7a7a53d","3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","3d6b98eb-c79e-460c-883b-9c997ffea009","411b1d1a-7b18-4425-90f0-da2c296625eb","4299b01d-c5ab-4283-ae2d-31aa1fdbbfec","432f2c6e-3092-44cd-bf1b-54249b31ad6b","43de8661-2844-46b7-bb39-15eb17f6b82e","43e20f96-27cb-4f67-b7e5-6228aea8e7b6","45fdd40d-5bc4-4fe7-9eb9-883c55f14a70","473ed916-1979-4222-b1e8-38d39c51fe03","4f3026f8-7217-4bf9-af6e-71bcad8bb1c5","502ff9a1-ac00-4ef2-96cb-0a0614085766","51a534c1-9193-4b8c-bbd2-b4e368930ead","5245dc0a-5d68-4a00-ad89-6255f3bee930","5406e730-2d78-47b4-ba27-fc933e691eab","55552c00-e696-4ac2-951e-156364cb1337","5710a503-9fbe-46ae-abd5-2663069b70db","57b2326c-e877-4995-82fc-221eda139718","5d222c9b-8733-4d3b-abaa-59f77da35546","6135126e-45b3-4fe7-a80f-82248b08ea7b","64902247-dbff-448d-987f-c89ac2e30538","6901ef7b-f98a-4b3a-b622-85196fe10ffb","696bb9a6-aa69-4de4-a566-5df21482bc51","71196507-ad87-406f-a4df-edc8a14b1575","73369c4a-c44b-4b7a-b3cc-07766ccb4e2a","75eac450-5d76-45da-975a-a47f1515ca01","7855cb39-b177-4d3b-bd72-0a18afd5415b","8151434e-f600-47a9-93df-16b483e88961","824601ea-5309-4ddf-bc61-486c992e309c","8e0f3d53-2c44-474d-9787-4713b7050c28","8e4f2f4a-8039-4ba0-9b6d-beecad106136","8eb102f2-a097-496b-8975-3d2cd6e31a8d","944709d1-19c5-461e-a509-d35f5314cc8e","980db746-8492-4784-ab7e-f6c3b10378e1","9c81b00b-87e1-4cce-bfc8-9583b3b8a234","9f454843-a34c-4619-a576-493f835993b4","a45c3495-d077-4241-b1d7-72fa109d0e6b","a96905fe-9d68-4a0c-9c4e-ce250411fcd9","ab7d0ab2-d774-415c-bd3f-a606f92ef3c3","adad636e-6844-49cb-bb07-54ff4f1a044f","adfa4015-b34e-4488-99e4-b20b4dc10324","b4b614f7-a43d-4e57-9766-25f7fef90d68","b8eebc63-ef4e-4144-9327-420f594806c6","bdc8358e-29a2-4efa-a99e-6023a27df35b","c0981bc0-6d81-46d5-a2fc-715c6a5662b8","c2875090-e4c1-4cec-be8a-7218c8774f6b","c5597192-fe4a-479a-8bf7-cdcf15d74d10","c66f7c07-f922-4abd-8805-71a0fade560f","c6e1c64f-1094-4a24-9d3e-8103fb4d94ab","c6e6e3f3-bc85-48dc-ad18-bb08d31d7308","cbdf7850-c12b-44e7-9a2a-2e88994f389f","ce0c52be-896a-479c-b92b-09bf3518d332","cf1f664f-fab8-46ef-9768-c3fc897d3913","cf35dad3-c846-4c5e-91db-577efd256f78","cfa001c3-f0fc-45cd-8a71-3e35d2026e1f","dab486f0-dfe1-46a8-b0d8-32e2a200b8e8","dc0f107c-d6af-40f2-b8fd-d6a8264071a5","e06bafea-36a4-40ac-8e47-2a2619fd46fd","e1083f09-5ed1-4bdf-8ac5-3c65482b8e5f","e446ef0a-2a74-42bf-bcd6-2b793506650e","e53f3cca-ca53-449c-9f09-737f317fb169","ea0bba2c-7a56-40f2-afac-00f638b54fc3","eb7f5240-b11f-4c58-9681-91c05d2c3f50","eb84cbb3-24d1-4565-9ec1-8bd3b9d4bec9","ed2c35d4-102a-4b73-8382-2ac35610faed","edf6b48c-90dc-4757-814e-999556997808","f0a80593-3eca-497d-afa0-90d16a414e1d","f1ba13f7-7414-47ce-9df3-a6aa0902c1b9","f25f2d19-18b4-4e7e-ad7b-8f30a193b3d6","f289c668-0c40-41e6-82af-ae6829b262d4","f40851bc-e6e8-4605-ba83-f44d932b4760","f502d85e-d523-4b8c-9dec-469aa08204df","f5653eaf-7d13-4c91-93c7-e30daca2ec3a","f5876a8c-263e-4134-a5b2-ba2453ed9080","fa1e38b4-4ced-4f4b-9a7b-b1b89ff13da7","fa93085f-260f-4f91-af1c-c85c03ca06fa","fdc662ec-5ed7-4d04-8993-6144ff01abc2","ff092982-3b6e-4f4c-8194-6b8201ee1246","oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-ff34df409a4806f1"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:isSubstituteFor"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:food-composition-and-adulteration:fflo-hasadulterationmethod","name":"fflo:hasAdulterationMethod","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":125,"article_count":98,"event_count":98,"article_ids":["0a113e2a-26d3-45e4-9064-7cfa2f39230b","0af3703f-23ec-4f8f-a1b6-45b4adb68b12","0ea7c6a7-d2c1-498f-aa00-f3fc942206ed","0ef4d3e4-844c-47ee-a430-8f171ec4c000","1df33743-1016-49ce-981b-862125c0893f","21fb2b00-9b86-4924-9a0d-248f976cfd93","255ac21d-c17e-4926-9dad-13db7698ed72","2ad1f047-985c-4c59-aa13-749fa75bcba9","301bb818-ff44-4346-9ffe-ad58bf13cfb2","31cae76c-aa62-4328-bd40-368275f60e9f","31f1f824-c698-4b97-a52a-1a1136a9ac6e","3278338f-1fa0-4045-9701-e237d5ad0930","336a89c4-d98a-4242-8803-4d479689bc4d","368930a7-2085-43bd-bb79-62d471c9e75c","36a70fc6-de5a-494c-9dc5-801fe7a7a53d","3797cfc4-05a5-422b-b823-ed3bb850f540","3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","3c0e9d23-f858-47eb-8e7a-23db1d42822a","3d6b98eb-c79e-460c-883b-9c997ffea009","4a638904-2bcf-4037-8afd-ec6e5b0b6b11","4c67d899-fab5-4e78-9274-526d6a4fe0bb","4cd73621-691c-4866-91c1-0b99d0d1a89a","4d7063c6-5201-4ce1-89ed-75ee21d51b98","502ff9a1-ac00-4ef2-96cb-0a0614085766","5118358f-2777-4bfd-a761-adb4bc1da763","5710a503-9fbe-46ae-abd5-2663069b70db","58c8e8bf-9cbd-46dd-8a8b-b1b5cbb0d58d","5a7bde0b-59e0-4f86-9b63-2bbebb593d41","62bc0e3c-1d90-4688-bc1b-e00f620c5c8c","634a0a0f-0899-427f-9396-6cc3c5442643","64902247-dbff-448d-987f-c89ac2e30538","67c4a0dd-5f32-4dde-b733-4a4a9e5dfafb","6a44ea24-a3bf-4ad8-96b1-5ae56cefb84c","7855cb39-b177-4d3b-bd72-0a18afd5415b","8151434e-f600-47a9-93df-16b483e88961","815dcb75-691c-4066-a898-b7ed46fdbdf2","81b21166-1d16-4aec-910f-b382f9680f5f","8779026e-22f2-4276-a7b9-695e4e569057","892c7a97-bb6b-47a5-9402-8a5293acf25b","8e0f3d53-2c44-474d-9787-4713b7050c28","8eb102f2-a097-496b-8975-3d2cd6e31a8d","8ecfae6d-fb77-4dfe-9f9b-f1425d8a13da","91aa9ca8-e7d7-4036-a22f-5c8c8e7fc2ce","944709d1-19c5-461e-a509-d35f5314cc8e","94d114b9-3c47-468e-8714-ed449f90e8e4","94faca18-b471-4748-8bab-f399641cedbd","97c9d44f-1ca4-489d-a786-dc23f1fe1175","980db746-8492-4784-ab7e-f6c3b10378e1","9849e210-d94b-448b-885e-7bdffe11cfe9","9c81b00b-87e1-4cce-bfc8-9583b3b8a234","9fe3b91d-3719-4260-926a-d5711bd1efc4","a06cd968-9dc5-42c5-a6e8-3d3c36dfc8c2","a96905fe-9d68-4a0c-9c4e-ce250411fcd9","ab7d0ab2-d774-415c-bd3f-a606f92ef3c3","b3e58970-8bf0-4e37-a8f9-dd4fce60bf46","b4a8aa1a-7262-4318-9579-9fff20f959a6","b556af30-b2db-4273-8b3b-a5b1ec113ebb","caae3943-065a-475a-a6fe-f5706ce3db97","cfa001c3-f0fc-45cd-8a71-3e35d2026e1f","d156577c-5001-4f1b-90f7-d7b21a37497b","d2f303e3-c25c-412f-8ae4-4ec525f68736","d301dc8a-7194-46ad-bf04-43efdc78c053","d6f9dd1e-cee9-48ff-a7e7-71d7a7b8f61d","d7f7d93d-fda2-48cd-89a3-7b5c35ec6480","d96f8ae8-4753-4f7b-9ec5-3238eca05841","dc0f107c-d6af-40f2-b8fd-d6a8264071a5","e500f58c-3afd-4143-b4d2-f60500bf9023","e70df749-9305-44b3-8a30-defc332a7fa4","e9029bad-f0af-4178-8545-61b8bf20d98f","ea51c75b-4b85-48fb-bbb7-8fde23c110aa","f1307eae-cbfb-4f04-b6cc-3facd9e296d6","f1ba13f7-7414-47ce-9df3-a6aa0902c1b9","f289c668-0c40-41e6-82af-ae6829b262d4","f40851bc-e6e8-4605-ba83-f44d932b4760","fa93085f-260f-4f91-af1c-c85c03ca06fa","fdc662ec-5ed7-4d04-8993-6144ff01abc2","ff092982-3b6e-4f4c-8194-6b8201ee1246","oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-055a850c7fce9512","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-63426d939d718e7f","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-7ced813eb9eb1314","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:hasAdulterationMethod"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:food-composition-and-adulteration:fflo-hasintentionality","name":"fflo:hasIntentionality","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":59,"article_count":56,"event_count":56,"article_ids":["0932679a-fe82-4a1e-949e-9d4fd17ed2a0","18f4411e-1d84-42c5-835a-97436ad30c7c","1b1069d2-3f50-4dd3-a8bd-0aeed6bacf98","1de65c17-36dd-4ba6-ada6-bcd98b556aad","22261df7-8974-447f-a1cf-192c59528f64","2255e304-d6ef-4707-b594-cbc3955019ec","2ad1f047-985c-4c59-aa13-749fa75bcba9","2d8a95d1-8554-4194-b427-4239c3f9ad5b","301bb818-ff44-4346-9ffe-ad58bf13cfb2","31f1f824-c698-4b97-a52a-1a1136a9ac6e","33326887-4ed0-4562-a0ac-b889d6ad53a9","336a89c4-d98a-4242-8803-4d479689bc4d","34dc1c1f-d12c-4230-bb1c-e41b6961f288","368930a7-2085-43bd-bb79-62d471c9e75c","36a70fc6-de5a-494c-9dc5-801fe7a7a53d","3797cfc4-05a5-422b-b823-ed3bb850f540","39e61860-2a60-448c-838e-a7f01e4d0c5c","3c0e9d23-f858-47eb-8e7a-23db1d42822a","4216dab3-b436-422a-a6ee-74b5858f7aa2","4260e03f-c3cd-480c-827c-7ebe3a09e913","4f3026f8-7217-4bf9-af6e-71bcad8bb1c5","54637d34-f16e-4e98-84c1-681a0fca559c","590fff58-7ba9-4a5b-8232-4c27d67f13b1","5d222c9b-8733-4d3b-abaa-59f77da35546","60ccacb1-7c41-4259-b651-bfbf60e7b53a","6a44ea24-a3bf-4ad8-96b1-5ae56cefb84c","75eac450-5d76-45da-975a-a47f1515ca01","7a59b547-cf09-4b46-bbfe-d7a7f34b7cfc","7ddc7283-670a-4dfb-9e38-a11aa0c579c2","892c7a97-bb6b-47a5-9402-8a5293acf25b","9379cea2-647c-459b-af54-770e31e9bbe1","944709d1-19c5-461e-a509-d35f5314cc8e","948eda84-20a8-442d-8a0a-ffba051904a4","9c81b00b-87e1-4cce-bfc8-9583b3b8a234","9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","abb94f1c-6bf3-442d-9749-eacc170b025c","b3e58970-8bf0-4e37-a8f9-dd4fce60bf46","b556af30-b2db-4273-8b3b-a5b1ec113ebb","b5940660-7f58-4123-bb25-6f78d4e1694d","c2875090-e4c1-4cec-be8a-7218c8774f6b","caae3943-065a-475a-a6fe-f5706ce3db97","dc0f107c-d6af-40f2-b8fd-d6a8264071a5","dd99547d-81d1-4764-ba78-52a1cddf906d","e06bafea-36a4-40ac-8e47-2a2619fd46fd","e1bbca7c-14db-40cf-a128-0219f12466a3","e9029bad-f0af-4178-8545-61b8bf20d98f","f19a484a-77bd-4389-8266-523228328091","f40851bc-e6e8-4605-ba83-f44d932b4760","f58af8d2-a271-4586-b2b4-1b399c9f84de","fdc662ec-5ed7-4d04-8993-6144ff01abc2","oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:hasIntentionality"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:food-composition-and-adulteration:fkg-hasingredient","name":"fkg:hasIngredient","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":90,"article_count":53,"event_count":53,"article_ids":["0a113e2a-26d3-45e4-9064-7cfa2f39230b","1a806023-ac1d-4da2-924e-25821c2554f5","1fe9639d-5c39-472e-94a7-73ac2b03bfce","2013c452-d1c8-41a0-abea-92e26d231790","21fb2b00-9b86-4924-9a0d-248f976cfd93","29a173b3-4587-4257-9c93-2f0c483079c5","3282adec-c328-4317-a091-a126587d78de","3e2829b3-2380-49cb-a370-77a313e8eaa1","411b1d1a-7b18-4425-90f0-da2c296625eb","484a6113-0a95-4624-8291-c00710260e4d","4974f73f-37bc-4300-8d31-d97ca337365b","554708da-6872-4a1b-91cc-3beeb59fbf2e","5f6c5fd0-a2f8-4bfe-9ac4-a8d06bc8640a","6411a3a1-2932-41eb-b497-f9a2400de74c","67c4a0dd-5f32-4dde-b733-4a4a9e5dfafb","706246bb-b5c8-4d73-81fa-2e93d040c762","70b9c7ef-3983-40dd-b904-5607537ff37f","73066633-67a8-4240-8c5a-3c4ae29b486d","747400a0-bfad-4fa2-8004-06f237d1c543","75eac450-5d76-45da-975a-a47f1515ca01","77ed2567-2595-48f0-891b-a753164f2866","81f9e1b1-71fd-45a2-9292-017420336059","83bf777b-6ee5-4e82-bd85-6e374853473a","84ea460e-bfc2-4977-aebb-32594a90693b","8b1ef2e6-f7a2-4db0-9589-42159cf06574","8e4f2f4a-8039-4ba0-9b6d-beecad106136","8ecfae6d-fb77-4dfe-9f9b-f1425d8a13da","905b10d3-5531-40bc-b5e3-84beb79f1af2","920f5e05-04f9-4545-b26d-ea48a1f18a2f","93c87fee-61ec-4ea8-bd4f-3434669835ee","a3ce7cd2-ee71-42ce-b4f7-96a81c6bd295","a7cc57e8-71f7-4536-ba7c-452e09344a18","aec84261-126b-4386-b0f4-15f160ca67ae","aed9cf49-b6d3-4952-8acb-37e1eae1c31a","b40ee428-0e50-4a51-aca9-a9074c0486cf","b77861f3-9e86-4450-a13f-4522abb6a8ef","bcd183c8-344e-4cb8-8561-8c2e6a027897","bdc8358e-29a2-4efa-a99e-6023a27df35b","cbdf7850-c12b-44e7-9a2a-2e88994f389f","cd235f2c-1119-4002-b756-61e2983b0232","cf1f664f-fab8-46ef-9768-c3fc897d3913","d156577c-5001-4f1b-90f7-d7b21a37497b","d7f7d93d-fda2-48cd-89a3-7b5c35ec6480","e1955bc5-123d-4ca0-b875-2d75b1f718f1","e446ef0a-2a74-42bf-bcd6-2b793506650e","f121b53e-c2bd-4ce5-878c-fd5a64863273","f1ba13f7-7414-47ce-9df3-a6aa0902c1b9","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-a0831d014f72baf3","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-d2df8ab69303fb55"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fkg:hasIngredient"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:food-composition-and-adulteration:fflo-belongstocategory","name":"fflo:belongsToCategory","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":87,"article_count":49,"event_count":49,"article_ids":["04c00967-a247-4802-b3c2-3f266885c385","0e518ac8-dc53-4c79-938a-bd26c1142eeb","178d6244-50cd-4bea-8e16-f951f6227a8c","194f3e22-f4b6-483b-9333-762c3a3b6b9d","23ff1efe-782a-4174-8f33-41a3ff0e8c44","2fc5c9f1-64d2-498f-8f7a-96d94b926f6d","336a89c4-d98a-4242-8803-4d479689bc4d","34dc1c1f-d12c-4230-bb1c-e41b6961f288","368930a7-2085-43bd-bb79-62d471c9e75c","3d6b98eb-c79e-460c-883b-9c997ffea009","4299b01d-c5ab-4283-ae2d-31aa1fdbbfec","438c4f31-19bd-4ff3-bed4-035569ec6cbf","451d9824-7933-403d-beaa-1ac6398509c9","58163259-bc87-4025-a6cc-f3a0848b52cf","7c914cb3-8ba1-4768-ac56-a051b75a6e8b","8187d86e-f46c-4e26-8188-a4e7b31de2f6","84ea460e-bfc2-4977-aebb-32594a90693b","85680853-3899-4f21-b262-dbe3e8893779","96621df7-0c9b-41e5-a5a6-3f21a24613d5","980db746-8492-4784-ab7e-f6c3b10378e1","9cbf8104-4fa2-4365-bc32-09eb2d1c9381","a7002128-c4bc-48cd-bed1-46a529e69132","b3e58970-8bf0-4e37-a8f9-dd4fce60bf46","b78601e1-6600-408f-bc8c-52407a676ecb","e500f58c-3afd-4143-b4d2-f60500bf9023","ed2c35d4-102a-4b73-8382-2ac35610faed","oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-23d97461886d2622","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-42c4efcdce45e35d","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-63426d939d718e7f","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-ce4031737a7654b3","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f1693a0670f7b784","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:belongsToCategory"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:food-composition-and-adulteration:fflo-hasingredient","name":"fflo:hasIngredient","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":15,"article_count":10,"event_count":10,"article_ids":["0109eea0-3adc-4177-a6f7-e3bc31bf237d","1ae756d4-675e-4a08-bc7d-ba6a3e922d5d","706f0136-7ae5-45f2-b804-e3a8c9a14d1c","8205ac1a-be22-438c-b3e0-f7aa463d3501","946d9238-09b9-474e-8481-5e734cedca7a","aed9cf49-b6d3-4952-8acb-37e1eae1c31a","dc9b6179-78d1-4eec-9df7-47aadc6c4002","e1955bc5-123d-4ca0-b875-2d75b1f718f1","f5c77efa-f72b-424c-a810-81cd552ba3de","oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:hasIngredient"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:food-composition-and-adulteration:fflo-constitutes","name":"fflo:constitutes","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":8,"article_count":7,"event_count":7,"article_ids":["3624ed70-d464-4caa-9b4e-4dfc2ed435dc","5118358f-2777-4bfd-a761-adb4bc1da763","75f7eb04-35fe-48ce-af4a-d0ccf3067076","95044e07-ad37-43f6-95b0-cebe1e9f8ce0","caae3943-065a-475a-a6fe-f5706ce3db97","oil-4b88eb2520f8cc22","oil-c94e003c369b3450"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:constitutes"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:food-composition-and-adulteration:fflo-infood","name":"fflo:inFood","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:inFood"]}]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:group:evidence-detection-and-provenance","name":"Evidence, detection, and provenance","definition":"Relationships describing evidence, detection, attribution, and provenance.","occurrences":1152,"article_count":370,"event_count":370,"article_ids":["008cc0e4-d7d7-475f-80d8-d81621e7b862","0109eea0-3adc-4177-a6f7-e3bc31bf237d","030df41e-ccfc-4023-a026-89cc92bf3253","03ea9124-befd-4983-bcdc-147e3ed3bf73","04c00967-a247-4802-b3c2-3f266885c385","05937ca4-de64-422f-ba56-878f6152027c","0932679a-fe82-4a1e-949e-9d4fd17ed2a0","0a113e2a-26d3-45e4-9064-7cfa2f39230b","0a23e582-3dac-4091-bf36-a08d511a3763","0a342064-5378-4aff-b4aa-34ae5c1ab66b","0aa842b8-1ac9-4243-a8b6-5d98d32d6089","0af3703f-23ec-4f8f-a1b6-45b4adb68b12","0b5a50e0-df3b-42ea-83c6-80bc16cf39fb","0d14295d-a954-4163-8974-ecb51bd464e8","0d96e6b1-57f6-4555-8711-703a6c818eea","0e464dfa-d504-4806-9005-c1ba38758bf8","0e518ac8-dc53-4c79-938a-bd26c1142eeb","0f7493be-b335-4851-9029-9e87ba0da155","0facca96-d90c-4f21-ba98-356f7f6b1622","10f36230-190b-4b13-8cfc-8d12c2f37080","141518ef-ce68-4969-bb2a-66f56733fab2","15f9d255-f348-4fb7-ba3d-003ab6adcfb2","178d6244-50cd-4bea-8e16-f951f6227a8c","18f4411e-1d84-42c5-835a-97436ad30c7c","1933f8f5-8812-4e24-85bd-cdbdc83f929e","1a066d87-0093-4ca8-9c10-84c004b76c48","1addfba0-b7e9-4722-85be-a642cdf63571","1ae756d4-675e-4a08-bc7d-ba6a3e922d5d","1b1069d2-3f50-4dd3-a8bd-0aeed6bacf98","1b74e29d-f583-4ee4-96bc-e93553c915b3","1bb0d3e5-6f04-4d91-a899-8b6f59bc228a","1c7ea343-020a-4266-9854-b12ebfa2cf50","1de4a13b-1497-421e-b5bc-a8ebbc7a3b18","1de65c17-36dd-4ba6-ada6-bcd98b556aad","1df33743-1016-49ce-981b-862125c0893f","1e6b9f5b-a065-4242-ae58-1f105455955f","1fe9639d-5c39-472e-94a7-73ac2b03bfce","2010c6e2-c9cb-4a3e-b22b-8cabf1044074","2013c452-d1c8-41a0-abea-92e26d231790","21fb2b00-9b86-4924-9a0d-248f976cfd93","22261df7-8974-447f-a1cf-192c59528f64","2255e304-d6ef-4707-b594-cbc3955019ec","229a7f40-f956-476e-8c84-3fd9ed3d6c29","2499d49c-748f-41d8-84d9-eed7a66ad43a","255ac21d-c17e-4926-9dad-13db7698ed72","2679a7a3-abde-4979-ac6e-5cf24113e0db","268e5866-7aea-4546-934f-f105a70b1096","26b11917-4e55-41d5-aeb1-64e8b44bedba","28a03096-e60c-4adb-b4fa-55f0bd28a95d","29a173b3-4587-4257-9c93-2f0c483079c5","2a59f77c-89ba-49fe-be6c-b3c9756a9940","2ad1f047-985c-4c59-aa13-749fa75bcba9","2b442757-da6a-46e5-ae37-b083e00062d3","2c075e82-3fe3-4b95-a68a-f0fad41e51f5","2d8a95d1-8554-4194-b427-4239c3f9ad5b","2f23ec7d-e712-46f5-ae1c-5e7634725242","2fe1bef6-e797-4d9f-bb5b-6f936d7a55dc","2fede3c0-46a7-46e8-a776-5a6fd6d3f08e","301bb818-ff44-4346-9ffe-ad58bf13cfb2","31cae76c-aa62-4328-bd40-368275f60e9f","3278338f-1fa0-4045-9701-e237d5ad0930","3282adec-c328-4317-a091-a126587d78de","33326887-4ed0-4562-a0ac-b889d6ad53a9","34b8b88f-e283-46cd-ba6e-f373dc3d4395","34dc1c1f-d12c-4230-bb1c-e41b6961f288","3624ed70-d464-4caa-9b4e-4dfc2ed435dc","3797cfc4-05a5-422b-b823-ed3bb850f540","3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","3911de79-cbfd-4eaa-9311-207b452faa93","39a9fb26-817d-404e-a150-4e4c5ebc037c","39e61860-2a60-448c-838e-a7f01e4d0c5c","3c0e9d23-f858-47eb-8e7a-23db1d42822a","3cdd0ffb-841b-4883-9b1a-df7b28022554","3e325b99-7611-4f89-8963-7f79c5ac4105","3f674523-5416-4b89-8cab-fe3ddf3c9e7e","411b1d1a-7b18-4425-90f0-da2c296625eb","4216dab3-b436-422a-a6ee-74b5858f7aa2","4260e03f-c3cd-480c-827c-7ebe3a09e913","4299b01d-c5ab-4283-ae2d-31aa1fdbbfec","432f2c6e-3092-44cd-bf1b-54249b31ad6b","43de8661-2844-46b7-bb39-15eb17f6b82e","445ff19b-5429-4a55-be3f-c4b03481b04f","4469e268-1b01-49b7-a436-ea4a88ba6269","451d9824-7933-403d-beaa-1ac6398509c9","4661fe17-e88d-41ab-a8c6-9aefcbbaed5c","471bc3da-bbd4-417c-875a-595a713be7fd","4726ed7e-d61a-4a2c-9e05-59cbaa4f1bf0","473ed916-1979-4222-b1e8-38d39c51fe03","47635cd8-696c-4adf-94ed-338f084a3d62","4974f73f-37bc-4300-8d31-d97ca337365b","4a021f95-539e-4217-98a0-d651be9a3b47","4a638904-2bcf-4037-8afd-ec6e5b0b6b11","4c67d899-fab5-4e78-9274-526d6a4fe0bb","4cd73621-691c-4866-91c1-0b99d0d1a89a","4d6ab7d0-4e16-4d1b-aa49-7f453c9352b6","4d7063c6-5201-4ce1-89ed-75ee21d51b98","4eb18b90-e310-48db-9531-68b146420749","4fa075c9-a30f-47e5-8f09-158017bfd6d6","502ff9a1-ac00-4ef2-96cb-0a0614085766","504dd102-6089-4fcb-a066-0006720862a7","5118358f-2777-4bfd-a761-adb4bc1da763","51a534c1-9193-4b8c-bbd2-b4e368930ead","5245dc0a-5d68-4a00-ad89-6255f3bee930","526515f5-4a82-4b0b-9e1c-7f3a2aa4cde4","534ab39c-32c3-46ea-a742-5095170a0003","5374dadc-cd7f-41df-b8d9-8ef7c10ec693","53f8ec9a-900f-481f-bfb5-a6ca452416ed","5406e730-2d78-47b4-ba27-fc933e691eab","54637d34-f16e-4e98-84c1-681a0fca559c","54686005-b842-4cc5-82b1-0276e36a42b6","550bda80-b5be-488a-89f6-64b9698b4033","55552c00-e696-4ac2-951e-156364cb1337","5710a503-9fbe-46ae-abd5-2663069b70db","5804b97c-c416-49d1-9fbd-5bb52c0595dd","58679f65-396b-4b1f-b725-9907ebc9f038","58ac029e-4204-42c4-8ff3-6dbd84dd382a","58c8e8bf-9cbd-46dd-8a8b-b1b5cbb0d58d","590fff58-7ba9-4a5b-8232-4c27d67f13b1","5a7bde0b-59e0-4f86-9b63-2bbebb593d41","5c86116b-5fae-45a9-b467-01fc8b26a166","5d222c9b-8733-4d3b-abaa-59f77da35546","5f6c5fd0-a2f8-4bfe-9ac4-a8d06bc8640a","5fa4530c-d60b-48c1-b6b2-371abff6d77a","60ccacb1-7c41-4259-b651-bfbf60e7b53a","6135126e-45b3-4fe7-a80f-82248b08ea7b","61a00782-20f7-4170-b4e2-d9d9157b3a3c","620bfde0-ec72-4b52-bfa4-e06ce3b56960","62bc0e3c-1d90-4688-bc1b-e00f620c5c8c","634a0a0f-0899-427f-9396-6cc3c5442643","6411a3a1-2932-41eb-b497-f9a2400de74c","66bb816a-1961-4e45-8460-9328304c7956","6721b632-2b4f-492a-840d-bb05d2a9f1af","672ecfdb-cb9d-485d-8fc1-76e6a8269fe7","67c4a0dd-5f32-4dde-b733-4a4a9e5dfafb","68753b50-8fe7-4499-bb2d-ddfcc7e16c94","6901ef7b-f98a-4b3a-b622-85196fe10ffb","696bb9a6-aa69-4de4-a566-5df21482bc51","6a44ea24-a3bf-4ad8-96b1-5ae56cefb84c","6ab671c9-310c-4d88-bd88-0251180b2345","6cf864fb-5956-4416-a1c5-f42153e66ec4","6ee56cf3-78f2-4420-bede-08f76397b2fb","6f4adcf4-c63b-41c9-b7f6-0b0f4e75c857","70b9c7ef-3983-40dd-b904-5607537ff37f","71196507-ad87-406f-a4df-edc8a14b1575","73066633-67a8-4240-8c5a-3c4ae29b486d","73369c4a-c44b-4b7a-b3cc-07766ccb4e2a","73e97a89-5b5f-4104-bc6a-50b8f564040a","747400a0-bfad-4fa2-8004-06f237d1c543","75eac450-5d76-45da-975a-a47f1515ca01","7855cb39-b177-4d3b-bd72-0a18afd5415b","79cfeedd-0cef-4026-962d-c86d241c4e56","79f059b8-00b2-4345-ad46-440c7bc371df","7a539249-77a2-4e2b-a29f-6952304d80d7","7a59b547-cf09-4b46-bbfe-d7a7f34b7cfc","7a707681-5edc-461c-b5a8-0057a374f3cc","7b3b345d-0902-4461-a6bc-747c26feb7f2","7c914cb3-8ba1-4768-ac56-a051b75a6e8b","7ddc7283-670a-4dfb-9e38-a11aa0c579c2","815dcb75-691c-4066-a898-b7ed46fdbdf2","8187d86e-f46c-4e26-8188-a4e7b31de2f6","81f9e1b1-71fd-45a2-9292-017420336059","824601ea-5309-4ddf-bc61-486c992e309c","835cbabf-d424-4f04-89cb-1d8c0b08f1ab","83bf777b-6ee5-4e82-bd85-6e374853473a","84a895b3-81ad-42e9-b54d-614c66aca856","84ea460e-bfc2-4977-aebb-32594a90693b","85680853-3899-4f21-b262-dbe3e8893779","8577ca11-d1ef-4517-846f-747a51b46f07","867c2a12-155a-4309-aff0-300c6125824c","86b559ac-3645-468b-9f43-7d961bd255d7","8779026e-22f2-4276-a7b9-695e4e569057","897c7de9-ed19-4ee2-a2d5-85b75355519d","8aaa4093-987c-4a1d-8fbd-8e1d1e495fe3","8b1ef2e6-f7a2-4db0-9589-42159cf06574","8e0f3d53-2c44-474d-9787-4713b7050c28","8eb102f2-a097-496b-8975-3d2cd6e31a8d","905b10d3-5531-40bc-b5e3-84beb79f1af2","920f5e05-04f9-4545-b26d-ea48a1f18a2f","9285d418-e4e3-40a1-b1d1-da857748bfd3","9379cea2-647c-459b-af54-770e31e9bbe1","93c87fee-61ec-4ea8-bd4f-3434669835ee","93ec7040-a06c-4da5-b0b1-626399456a8a","944709d1-19c5-461e-a509-d35f5314cc8e","946d9238-09b9-474e-8481-5e734cedca7a","948eda84-20a8-442d-8a0a-ffba051904a4","94d114b9-3c47-468e-8714-ed449f90e8e4","94faca18-b471-4748-8bab-f399641cedbd","95b8351c-9ddb-457d-9035-ad3b6d181dc7","96adc5c1-5a68-473e-9d38-85bed792c8fc","980db746-8492-4784-ab7e-f6c3b10378e1","9849e210-d94b-448b-885e-7bdffe11cfe9","9bd6a50e-945d-42d4-88de-97e83b4c3b06","9c74f902-2ef0-4269-b436-acc19aa11ea5","9c81b00b-87e1-4cce-bfc8-9583b3b8a234","9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","9d92713b-a9c4-4b7e-87f4-c4fd443e38b5","9f454843-a34c-4619-a576-493f835993b4","9fe3b91d-3719-4260-926a-d5711bd1efc4","a06cd968-9dc5-42c5-a6e8-3d3c36dfc8c2","a18ba308-f8ab-4590-b466-daf80aa2b59c","a3aeeb23-ea47-454e-9079-05e2142e157d","a3ce7cd2-ee71-42ce-b4f7-96a81c6bd295","a45c3495-d077-4241-b1d7-72fa109d0e6b","a6385d09-ca9d-4f95-b5ba-4f50630bec35","a96905fe-9d68-4a0c-9c4e-ce250411fcd9","aa57f0d8-8cb4-4c4c-8ef4-4c4acdef25e4","ab7d0ab2-d774-415c-bd3f-a606f92ef3c3","abb94f1c-6bf3-442d-9749-eacc170b025c","ac5e071a-48a2-4a53-a1f6-5fc7b6d35280","adad636e-6844-49cb-bb07-54ff4f1a044f","adfa4015-b34e-4488-99e4-b20b4dc10324","aec84261-126b-4386-b0f4-15f160ca67ae","b293dea5-f7e1-4889-a56d-f823569cdff4","b3b632d3-bab8-43e4-9749-51b79e59f7dd","b4a8aa1a-7262-4318-9579-9fff20f959a6","b4b614f7-a43d-4e57-9766-25f7fef90d68","b55fc156-b5e6-49b6-b4f1-e092d3b4f553","b5940660-7f58-4123-bb25-6f78d4e1694d","b8eebc63-ef4e-4144-9327-420f594806c6","bc813ec4-3453-4fe2-a5d0-884fdb51bfc7","bcd183c8-344e-4cb8-8561-8c2e6a027897","bcd80071-6449-4036-accf-62939d2bc771","c0981bc0-6d81-46d5-a2fc-715c6a5662b8","c2875090-e4c1-4cec-be8a-7218c8774f6b","c349f006-e1f4-498e-970a-626a724e2231","c3aa82e4-0707-4514-a535-22d6d4a7f0b2","c4b35547-a0d3-4cad-b391-177ba64d7c63","c51ad2dc-5440-4692-bdac-73968c6ad4d2","c5597192-fe4a-479a-8bf7-cdcf15d74d10","c66f7c07-f922-4abd-8805-71a0fade560f","c6b3635d-7479-4594-9803-195c9d36f4a1","c6e6e3f3-bc85-48dc-ad18-bb08d31d7308","c7589046-9f75-46b4-bd78-c3fe0703df52","c7803b74-2f5d-47d0-a09e-c27ed98ec1a3","c7af7c66-9a6d-42c8-8695-bcd164ed856b","c999d71f-777d-4d80-9f37-37391f97acd4","caae3943-065a-475a-a6fe-f5706ce3db97","cb333cad-a0a7-4971-8f06-e4ca49e58c39","cbdf7850-c12b-44e7-9a2a-2e88994f389f","cd235f2c-1119-4002-b756-61e2983b0232","ce0c52be-896a-479c-b92b-09bf3518d332","cf1f664f-fab8-46ef-9768-c3fc897d3913","cf35dad3-c846-4c5e-91db-577efd256f78","cfa001c3-f0fc-45cd-8a71-3e35d2026e1f","cfd3be60-c380-4a63-8e12-5fd8af9b72bd","d11fa038-1162-4d93-9df5-6d5b35b8628b","d156577c-5001-4f1b-90f7-d7b21a37497b","d18985ea-8239-498e-9147-eda1d0bb8bde","d20d6d55-e1d9-462f-902a-31987fc17f06","d301dc8a-7194-46ad-bf04-43efdc78c053","d315d00d-a3eb-4c0f-9554-c1395585910f","d3bd5582-331f-4b89-96d8-d988dabaecd2","d405b9b8-3fd3-4230-a3d3-ccdd34abd185","d5ff3294-0ecd-48eb-b9dd-a2c0282a055a","d6f9dd1e-cee9-48ff-a7e7-71d7a7b8f61d","d7c49d74-0c9c-470b-94ad-c7ccaa111eaf","dab486f0-dfe1-46a8-b0d8-32e2a200b8e8","dc0f107c-d6af-40f2-b8fd-d6a8264071a5","dc9b6179-78d1-4eec-9df7-47aadc6c4002","dd99547d-81d1-4764-ba78-52a1cddf906d","ddada193-97b9-4ccc-8a51-bfbea77a0c06","df6dd614-6785-4c3a-b6c7-1e091a751c64","e06bafea-36a4-40ac-8e47-2a2619fd46fd","e1955bc5-123d-4ca0-b875-2d75b1f718f1","e1bbca7c-14db-40cf-a128-0219f12466a3","e256486b-ee32-4d0f-9cba-d02bf4bd780a","e27aa94c-fa47-4a58-bc17-1e5d3387b739","e2f38cc3-06ff-4db2-8aad-a537c1e1d0c8","e446ef0a-2a74-42bf-bcd6-2b793506650e","e500f58c-3afd-4143-b4d2-f60500bf9023","e53f3cca-ca53-449c-9f09-737f317fb169","e57d61a5-e3ec-423d-ad96-243fbfae502b","e6d36e44-00e2-4f9e-95b1-e892e44117eb","e6e7e00b-0ede-4741-8419-066a93e431cd","e6f33250-4650-42ce-96e8-87ce7eebc853","e70df749-9305-44b3-8a30-defc332a7fa4","e8fbbd18-0c64-4437-9ea9-4b4877081943","e9029bad-f0af-4178-8545-61b8bf20d98f","ea0bba2c-7a56-40f2-afac-00f638b54fc3","ea27969f-7a0b-4e5c-9893-7763d5fdbfbf","ea6c8861-7a39-4e19-8e71-58720131fa8d","eac2c9bd-6ddc-48dc-92e0-405c318acfb0","eb84cbb3-24d1-4565-9ec1-8bd3b9d4bec9","ec990258-7999-4c93-81af-59b6ab2c65df","ed2c35d4-102a-4b73-8382-2ac35610faed","edf6b48c-90dc-4757-814e-999556997808","ef391115-fde1-44aa-ab00-abb8e2e7ec82","efb7c5ac-4ac5-4964-80cb-f95ebaa0e04c","f1307eae-cbfb-4f04-b6cc-3facd9e296d6","f19a484a-77bd-4389-8266-523228328091","f1ba13f7-7414-47ce-9df3-a6aa0902c1b9","f1f602c9-64cd-4bfc-855c-fb8060a9c483","f24f8cd0-0ca1-49cf-8cf1-4a5e6b938fe3","f25f2d19-18b4-4e7e-ad7b-8f30a193b3d6","f267ac1f-eff8-417a-8920-f8d37e384f79","f319102d-533a-41ff-9f08-6bda6778bb7e","f40851bc-e6e8-4605-ba83-f44d932b4760","f4c53608-9890-4b9f-89a3-7c1028bc1e05","f502d85e-d523-4b8c-9dec-469aa08204df","f5653eaf-7d13-4c91-93c7-e30daca2ec3a","f58af8d2-a271-4586-b2b4-1b399c9f84de","f5c77efa-f72b-424c-a810-81cd552ba3de","f62defd3-7975-4edf-8f34-40a36b487ac8","f6e3366d-13bc-4a60-94b6-f77a2c2032c0","f9720bd0-18fb-4774-96e6-eca25490f73e","fa1e38b4-4ced-4f4b-9a7b-b1b89ff13da7","fa93085f-260f-4f91-af1c-c85c03ca06fa","fb4d21e7-be93-4775-905f-977427db28c4","fdc662ec-5ed7-4d04-8993-6144ff01abc2","fe4e9bc0-2802-4dd8-97e4-27704fad2a1b","fec4e8d2-6a2f-4046-b9d4-85a831f76655","ff092982-3b6e-4f4c-8194-6b8201ee1246","oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0","oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","oil-156fd0980ec51fe6","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-63426d939d718e7f","oil-66b89ef48f4536a9","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-7269f661e72c703f","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-846611108e27fafb","oil-86a403aef71f924e","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-a0831d014f72baf3","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-c72d68cafd2478be","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-c94e003c369b3450","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-d276b566dce62194","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f1693a0670f7b784","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","oil-fcda56b4bb45ffd3","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5"],"entries":[{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:evidence-detection-and-provenance:prov-wasassociatedwith","name":"prov:wasAssociatedWith","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":615,"article_count":249,"event_count":249,"article_ids":["008cc0e4-d7d7-475f-80d8-d81621e7b862","030df41e-ccfc-4023-a026-89cc92bf3253","03ea9124-befd-4983-bcdc-147e3ed3bf73","05937ca4-de64-422f-ba56-878f6152027c","0932679a-fe82-4a1e-949e-9d4fd17ed2a0","0aa842b8-1ac9-4243-a8b6-5d98d32d6089","0b5a50e0-df3b-42ea-83c6-80bc16cf39fb","0d14295d-a954-4163-8974-ecb51bd464e8","0e464dfa-d504-4806-9005-c1ba38758bf8","0e518ac8-dc53-4c79-938a-bd26c1142eeb","0facca96-d90c-4f21-ba98-356f7f6b1622","141518ef-ce68-4969-bb2a-66f56733fab2","15f9d255-f348-4fb7-ba3d-003ab6adcfb2","1a066d87-0093-4ca8-9c10-84c004b76c48","1addfba0-b7e9-4722-85be-a642cdf63571","1ae756d4-675e-4a08-bc7d-ba6a3e922d5d","1b1069d2-3f50-4dd3-a8bd-0aeed6bacf98","1b74e29d-f583-4ee4-96bc-e93553c915b3","1bb0d3e5-6f04-4d91-a899-8b6f59bc228a","1c7ea343-020a-4266-9854-b12ebfa2cf50","1de4a13b-1497-421e-b5bc-a8ebbc7a3b18","1de65c17-36dd-4ba6-ada6-bcd98b556aad","1df33743-1016-49ce-981b-862125c0893f","1e6b9f5b-a065-4242-ae58-1f105455955f","2010c6e2-c9cb-4a3e-b22b-8cabf1044074","2013c452-d1c8-41a0-abea-92e26d231790","21fb2b00-9b86-4924-9a0d-248f976cfd93","22261df7-8974-447f-a1cf-192c59528f64","2255e304-d6ef-4707-b594-cbc3955019ec","229a7f40-f956-476e-8c84-3fd9ed3d6c29","2499d49c-748f-41d8-84d9-eed7a66ad43a","255ac21d-c17e-4926-9dad-13db7698ed72","2679a7a3-abde-4979-ac6e-5cf24113e0db","268e5866-7aea-4546-934f-f105a70b1096","28a03096-e60c-4adb-b4fa-55f0bd28a95d","2a59f77c-89ba-49fe-be6c-b3c9756a9940","2b442757-da6a-46e5-ae37-b083e00062d3","2c075e82-3fe3-4b95-a68a-f0fad41e51f5","2d8a95d1-8554-4194-b427-4239c3f9ad5b","2f23ec7d-e712-46f5-ae1c-5e7634725242","301bb818-ff44-4346-9ffe-ad58bf13cfb2","31cae76c-aa62-4328-bd40-368275f60e9f","3278338f-1fa0-4045-9701-e237d5ad0930","3282adec-c328-4317-a091-a126587d78de","33326887-4ed0-4562-a0ac-b889d6ad53a9","34b8b88f-e283-46cd-ba6e-f373dc3d4395","3797cfc4-05a5-422b-b823-ed3bb850f540","3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","39a9fb26-817d-404e-a150-4e4c5ebc037c","39e61860-2a60-448c-838e-a7f01e4d0c5c","3c0e9d23-f858-47eb-8e7a-23db1d42822a","3cdd0ffb-841b-4883-9b1a-df7b28022554","3e325b99-7611-4f89-8963-7f79c5ac4105","3f674523-5416-4b89-8cab-fe3ddf3c9e7e","4216dab3-b436-422a-a6ee-74b5858f7aa2","4260e03f-c3cd-480c-827c-7ebe3a09e913","445ff19b-5429-4a55-be3f-c4b03481b04f","4661fe17-e88d-41ab-a8c6-9aefcbbaed5c","4726ed7e-d61a-4a2c-9e05-59cbaa4f1bf0","473ed916-1979-4222-b1e8-38d39c51fe03","47635cd8-696c-4adf-94ed-338f084a3d62","4974f73f-37bc-4300-8d31-d97ca337365b","4a638904-2bcf-4037-8afd-ec6e5b0b6b11","4d6ab7d0-4e16-4d1b-aa49-7f453c9352b6","4d7063c6-5201-4ce1-89ed-75ee21d51b98","4eb18b90-e310-48db-9531-68b146420749","4fa075c9-a30f-47e5-8f09-158017bfd6d6","502ff9a1-ac00-4ef2-96cb-0a0614085766","51a534c1-9193-4b8c-bbd2-b4e368930ead","526515f5-4a82-4b0b-9e1c-7f3a2aa4cde4","534ab39c-32c3-46ea-a742-5095170a0003","5374dadc-cd7f-41df-b8d9-8ef7c10ec693","53f8ec9a-900f-481f-bfb5-a6ca452416ed","5406e730-2d78-47b4-ba27-fc933e691eab","54637d34-f16e-4e98-84c1-681a0fca559c","54686005-b842-4cc5-82b1-0276e36a42b6","5710a503-9fbe-46ae-abd5-2663069b70db","5804b97c-c416-49d1-9fbd-5bb52c0595dd","58ac029e-4204-42c4-8ff3-6dbd84dd382a","58c8e8bf-9cbd-46dd-8a8b-b1b5cbb0d58d","590fff58-7ba9-4a5b-8232-4c27d67f13b1","5a7bde0b-59e0-4f86-9b63-2bbebb593d41","5c86116b-5fae-45a9-b467-01fc8b26a166","5d222c9b-8733-4d3b-abaa-59f77da35546","60ccacb1-7c41-4259-b651-bfbf60e7b53a","6135126e-45b3-4fe7-a80f-82248b08ea7b","61a00782-20f7-4170-b4e2-d9d9157b3a3c","620bfde0-ec72-4b52-bfa4-e06ce3b56960","634a0a0f-0899-427f-9396-6cc3c5442643","6411a3a1-2932-41eb-b497-f9a2400de74c","66bb816a-1961-4e45-8460-9328304c7956","672ecfdb-cb9d-485d-8fc1-76e6a8269fe7","68753b50-8fe7-4499-bb2d-ddfcc7e16c94","696bb9a6-aa69-4de4-a566-5df21482bc51","6a44ea24-a3bf-4ad8-96b1-5ae56cefb84c","6ab671c9-310c-4d88-bd88-0251180b2345","6cf864fb-5956-4416-a1c5-f42153e66ec4","6f4adcf4-c63b-41c9-b7f6-0b0f4e75c857","70b9c7ef-3983-40dd-b904-5607537ff37f","71196507-ad87-406f-a4df-edc8a14b1575","73369c4a-c44b-4b7a-b3cc-07766ccb4e2a","73e97a89-5b5f-4104-bc6a-50b8f564040a","747400a0-bfad-4fa2-8004-06f237d1c543","79f059b8-00b2-4345-ad46-440c7bc371df","7a539249-77a2-4e2b-a29f-6952304d80d7","7a59b547-cf09-4b46-bbfe-d7a7f34b7cfc","7a707681-5edc-461c-b5a8-0057a374f3cc","7b3b345d-0902-4461-a6bc-747c26feb7f2","7ddc7283-670a-4dfb-9e38-a11aa0c579c2","815dcb75-691c-4066-a898-b7ed46fdbdf2","8187d86e-f46c-4e26-8188-a4e7b31de2f6","81f9e1b1-71fd-45a2-9292-017420336059","824601ea-5309-4ddf-bc61-486c992e309c","835cbabf-d424-4f04-89cb-1d8c0b08f1ab","83bf777b-6ee5-4e82-bd85-6e374853473a","84ea460e-bfc2-4977-aebb-32594a90693b","85680853-3899-4f21-b262-dbe3e8893779","8577ca11-d1ef-4517-846f-747a51b46f07","86b559ac-3645-468b-9f43-7d961bd255d7","8779026e-22f2-4276-a7b9-695e4e569057","8b1ef2e6-f7a2-4db0-9589-42159cf06574","905b10d3-5531-40bc-b5e3-84beb79f1af2","9285d418-e4e3-40a1-b1d1-da857748bfd3","9379cea2-647c-459b-af54-770e31e9bbe1","93ec7040-a06c-4da5-b0b1-626399456a8a","944709d1-19c5-461e-a509-d35f5314cc8e","948eda84-20a8-442d-8a0a-ffba051904a4","94d114b9-3c47-468e-8714-ed449f90e8e4","94faca18-b471-4748-8bab-f399641cedbd","95b8351c-9ddb-457d-9035-ad3b6d181dc7","980db746-8492-4784-ab7e-f6c3b10378e1","9849e210-d94b-448b-885e-7bdffe11cfe9","9c74f902-2ef0-4269-b436-acc19aa11ea5","9c81b00b-87e1-4cce-bfc8-9583b3b8a234","9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","9d92713b-a9c4-4b7e-87f4-c4fd443e38b5","9f454843-a34c-4619-a576-493f835993b4","a06cd968-9dc5-42c5-a6e8-3d3c36dfc8c2","a3aeeb23-ea47-454e-9079-05e2142e157d","a3ce7cd2-ee71-42ce-b4f7-96a81c6bd295","a45c3495-d077-4241-b1d7-72fa109d0e6b","a6385d09-ca9d-4f95-b5ba-4f50630bec35","a96905fe-9d68-4a0c-9c4e-ce250411fcd9","aa57f0d8-8cb4-4c4c-8ef4-4c4acdef25e4","ab7d0ab2-d774-415c-bd3f-a606f92ef3c3","abb94f1c-6bf3-442d-9749-eacc170b025c","ac5e071a-48a2-4a53-a1f6-5fc7b6d35280","adfa4015-b34e-4488-99e4-b20b4dc10324","aec84261-126b-4386-b0f4-15f160ca67ae","b293dea5-f7e1-4889-a56d-f823569cdff4","b3b632d3-bab8-43e4-9749-51b79e59f7dd","b4a8aa1a-7262-4318-9579-9fff20f959a6","b4b614f7-a43d-4e57-9766-25f7fef90d68","b55fc156-b5e6-49b6-b4f1-e092d3b4f553","b5940660-7f58-4123-bb25-6f78d4e1694d","b8eebc63-ef4e-4144-9327-420f594806c6","bc813ec4-3453-4fe2-a5d0-884fdb51bfc7","bcd183c8-344e-4cb8-8561-8c2e6a027897","bcd80071-6449-4036-accf-62939d2bc771","c0981bc0-6d81-46d5-a2fc-715c6a5662b8","c2875090-e4c1-4cec-be8a-7218c8774f6b","c3aa82e4-0707-4514-a535-22d6d4a7f0b2","c51ad2dc-5440-4692-bdac-73968c6ad4d2","c5597192-fe4a-479a-8bf7-cdcf15d74d10","c66f7c07-f922-4abd-8805-71a0fade560f","c6b3635d-7479-4594-9803-195c9d36f4a1","c6e6e3f3-bc85-48dc-ad18-bb08d31d7308","c7589046-9f75-46b4-bd78-c3fe0703df52","c7803b74-2f5d-47d0-a09e-c27ed98ec1a3","c7af7c66-9a6d-42c8-8695-bcd164ed856b","c999d71f-777d-4d80-9f37-37391f97acd4","cb333cad-a0a7-4971-8f06-e4ca49e58c39","cd235f2c-1119-4002-b756-61e2983b0232","ce0c52be-896a-479c-b92b-09bf3518d332","cf1f664f-fab8-46ef-9768-c3fc897d3913","cf35dad3-c846-4c5e-91db-577efd256f78","d18985ea-8239-498e-9147-eda1d0bb8bde","d20d6d55-e1d9-462f-902a-31987fc17f06","d301dc8a-7194-46ad-bf04-43efdc78c053","d315d00d-a3eb-4c0f-9554-c1395585910f","d3bd5582-331f-4b89-96d8-d988dabaecd2","d6f9dd1e-cee9-48ff-a7e7-71d7a7b8f61d","d7c49d74-0c9c-470b-94ad-c7ccaa111eaf","dab486f0-dfe1-46a8-b0d8-32e2a200b8e8","dc0f107c-d6af-40f2-b8fd-d6a8264071a5","dd99547d-81d1-4764-ba78-52a1cddf906d","ddada193-97b9-4ccc-8a51-bfbea77a0c06","e06bafea-36a4-40ac-8e47-2a2619fd46fd","e1bbca7c-14db-40cf-a128-0219f12466a3","e256486b-ee32-4d0f-9cba-d02bf4bd780a","e27aa94c-fa47-4a58-bc17-1e5d3387b739","e446ef0a-2a74-42bf-bcd6-2b793506650e","e500f58c-3afd-4143-b4d2-f60500bf9023","e53f3cca-ca53-449c-9f09-737f317fb169","e6d36e44-00e2-4f9e-95b1-e892e44117eb","e6e7e00b-0ede-4741-8419-066a93e431cd","e8fbbd18-0c64-4437-9ea9-4b4877081943","e9029bad-f0af-4178-8545-61b8bf20d98f","ea6c8861-7a39-4e19-8e71-58720131fa8d","eb84cbb3-24d1-4565-9ec1-8bd3b9d4bec9","ec990258-7999-4c93-81af-59b6ab2c65df","ed2c35d4-102a-4b73-8382-2ac35610faed","efb7c5ac-4ac5-4964-80cb-f95ebaa0e04c","f1307eae-cbfb-4f04-b6cc-3facd9e296d6","f19a484a-77bd-4389-8266-523228328091","f1ba13f7-7414-47ce-9df3-a6aa0902c1b9","f24f8cd0-0ca1-49cf-8cf1-4a5e6b938fe3","f25f2d19-18b4-4e7e-ad7b-8f30a193b3d6","f267ac1f-eff8-417a-8920-f8d37e384f79","f40851bc-e6e8-4605-ba83-f44d932b4760","f4c53608-9890-4b9f-89a3-7c1028bc1e05","f502d85e-d523-4b8c-9dec-469aa08204df","f58af8d2-a271-4586-b2b4-1b399c9f84de","f5c77efa-f72b-424c-a810-81cd552ba3de","f62defd3-7975-4edf-8f34-40a36b487ac8","f6e3366d-13bc-4a60-94b6-f77a2c2032c0","f9720bd0-18fb-4774-96e6-eca25490f73e","fa93085f-260f-4f91-af1c-c85c03ca06fa","fb4d21e7-be93-4775-905f-977427db28c4","fe4e9bc0-2802-4dd8-97e4-27704fad2a1b","ff092982-3b6e-4f4c-8194-6b8201ee1246","oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0","oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","oil-156fd0980ec51fe6","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-66b89ef48f4536a9","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-86a403aef71f924e","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f1693a0670f7b784","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["prov:wasAssociatedWith"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:evidence-detection-and-provenance:prov-used","name":"prov:used","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":239,"article_count":175,"event_count":175,"article_ids":["008cc0e4-d7d7-475f-80d8-d81621e7b862","0932679a-fe82-4a1e-949e-9d4fd17ed2a0","0a342064-5378-4aff-b4aa-34ae5c1ab66b","0aa842b8-1ac9-4243-a8b6-5d98d32d6089","0b5a50e0-df3b-42ea-83c6-80bc16cf39fb","0e518ac8-dc53-4c79-938a-bd26c1142eeb","0facca96-d90c-4f21-ba98-356f7f6b1622","15f9d255-f348-4fb7-ba3d-003ab6adcfb2","1addfba0-b7e9-4722-85be-a642cdf63571","1ae756d4-675e-4a08-bc7d-ba6a3e922d5d","1b1069d2-3f50-4dd3-a8bd-0aeed6bacf98","1b74e29d-f583-4ee4-96bc-e93553c915b3","1c7ea343-020a-4266-9854-b12ebfa2cf50","1df33743-1016-49ce-981b-862125c0893f","21fb2b00-9b86-4924-9a0d-248f976cfd93","2255e304-d6ef-4707-b594-cbc3955019ec","2679a7a3-abde-4979-ac6e-5cf24113e0db","28a03096-e60c-4adb-b4fa-55f0bd28a95d","2a59f77c-89ba-49fe-be6c-b3c9756a9940","2ad1f047-985c-4c59-aa13-749fa75bcba9","2c075e82-3fe3-4b95-a68a-f0fad41e51f5","2d8a95d1-8554-4194-b427-4239c3f9ad5b","2f23ec7d-e712-46f5-ae1c-5e7634725242","2fe1bef6-e797-4d9f-bb5b-6f936d7a55dc","2fede3c0-46a7-46e8-a776-5a6fd6d3f08e","3278338f-1fa0-4045-9701-e237d5ad0930","3282adec-c328-4317-a091-a126587d78de","33326887-4ed0-4562-a0ac-b889d6ad53a9","34dc1c1f-d12c-4230-bb1c-e41b6961f288","3624ed70-d464-4caa-9b4e-4dfc2ed435dc","3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","3911de79-cbfd-4eaa-9311-207b452faa93","39a9fb26-817d-404e-a150-4e4c5ebc037c","3cdd0ffb-841b-4883-9b1a-df7b28022554","3e325b99-7611-4f89-8963-7f79c5ac4105","4216dab3-b436-422a-a6ee-74b5858f7aa2","4260e03f-c3cd-480c-827c-7ebe3a09e913","43de8661-2844-46b7-bb39-15eb17f6b82e","4661fe17-e88d-41ab-a8c6-9aefcbbaed5c","4726ed7e-d61a-4a2c-9e05-59cbaa4f1bf0","473ed916-1979-4222-b1e8-38d39c51fe03","47635cd8-696c-4adf-94ed-338f084a3d62","4a021f95-539e-4217-98a0-d651be9a3b47","4a638904-2bcf-4037-8afd-ec6e5b0b6b11","4d6ab7d0-4e16-4d1b-aa49-7f453c9352b6","4d7063c6-5201-4ce1-89ed-75ee21d51b98","4eb18b90-e310-48db-9531-68b146420749","4fa075c9-a30f-47e5-8f09-158017bfd6d6","502ff9a1-ac00-4ef2-96cb-0a0614085766","504dd102-6089-4fcb-a066-0006720862a7","526515f5-4a82-4b0b-9e1c-7f3a2aa4cde4","534ab39c-32c3-46ea-a742-5095170a0003","5374dadc-cd7f-41df-b8d9-8ef7c10ec693","54686005-b842-4cc5-82b1-0276e36a42b6","55552c00-e696-4ac2-951e-156364cb1337","5710a503-9fbe-46ae-abd5-2663069b70db","58ac029e-4204-42c4-8ff3-6dbd84dd382a","590fff58-7ba9-4a5b-8232-4c27d67f13b1","5a7bde0b-59e0-4f86-9b63-2bbebb593d41","5c86116b-5fae-45a9-b467-01fc8b26a166","6135126e-45b3-4fe7-a80f-82248b08ea7b","61a00782-20f7-4170-b4e2-d9d9157b3a3c","620bfde0-ec72-4b52-bfa4-e06ce3b56960","634a0a0f-0899-427f-9396-6cc3c5442643","6411a3a1-2932-41eb-b497-f9a2400de74c","66bb816a-1961-4e45-8460-9328304c7956","672ecfdb-cb9d-485d-8fc1-76e6a8269fe7","68753b50-8fe7-4499-bb2d-ddfcc7e16c94","696bb9a6-aa69-4de4-a566-5df21482bc51","6cf864fb-5956-4416-a1c5-f42153e66ec4","6ee56cf3-78f2-4420-bede-08f76397b2fb","6f4adcf4-c63b-41c9-b7f6-0b0f4e75c857","73e97a89-5b5f-4104-bc6a-50b8f564040a","79f059b8-00b2-4345-ad46-440c7bc371df","7a539249-77a2-4e2b-a29f-6952304d80d7","7a59b547-cf09-4b46-bbfe-d7a7f34b7cfc","7a707681-5edc-461c-b5a8-0057a374f3cc","7b3b345d-0902-4461-a6bc-747c26feb7f2","7ddc7283-670a-4dfb-9e38-a11aa0c579c2","8187d86e-f46c-4e26-8188-a4e7b31de2f6","81f9e1b1-71fd-45a2-9292-017420336059","835cbabf-d424-4f04-89cb-1d8c0b08f1ab","84a895b3-81ad-42e9-b54d-614c66aca856","84ea460e-bfc2-4977-aebb-32594a90693b","86b559ac-3645-468b-9f43-7d961bd255d7","8779026e-22f2-4276-a7b9-695e4e569057","897c7de9-ed19-4ee2-a2d5-85b75355519d","8aaa4093-987c-4a1d-8fbd-8e1d1e495fe3","8b1ef2e6-f7a2-4db0-9589-42159cf06574","8e0f3d53-2c44-474d-9787-4713b7050c28","944709d1-19c5-461e-a509-d35f5314cc8e","94d114b9-3c47-468e-8714-ed449f90e8e4","94faca18-b471-4748-8bab-f399641cedbd","95b8351c-9ddb-457d-9035-ad3b6d181dc7","9849e210-d94b-448b-885e-7bdffe11cfe9","9c74f902-2ef0-4269-b436-acc19aa11ea5","9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","9d92713b-a9c4-4b7e-87f4-c4fd443e38b5","9f454843-a34c-4619-a576-493f835993b4","a06cd968-9dc5-42c5-a6e8-3d3c36dfc8c2","a45c3495-d077-4241-b1d7-72fa109d0e6b","abb94f1c-6bf3-442d-9749-eacc170b025c","adfa4015-b34e-4488-99e4-b20b4dc10324","aec84261-126b-4386-b0f4-15f160ca67ae","b3b632d3-bab8-43e4-9749-51b79e59f7dd","b55fc156-b5e6-49b6-b4f1-e092d3b4f553","b5940660-7f58-4123-bb25-6f78d4e1694d","b8eebc63-ef4e-4144-9327-420f594806c6","bc813ec4-3453-4fe2-a5d0-884fdb51bfc7","c0981bc0-6d81-46d5-a2fc-715c6a5662b8","c2875090-e4c1-4cec-be8a-7218c8774f6b","c349f006-e1f4-498e-970a-626a724e2231","c51ad2dc-5440-4692-bdac-73968c6ad4d2","c5597192-fe4a-479a-8bf7-cdcf15d74d10","c6e6e3f3-bc85-48dc-ad18-bb08d31d7308","c7803b74-2f5d-47d0-a09e-c27ed98ec1a3","c7af7c66-9a6d-42c8-8695-bcd164ed856b","cf35dad3-c846-4c5e-91db-577efd256f78","cfd3be60-c380-4a63-8e12-5fd8af9b72bd","d18985ea-8239-498e-9147-eda1d0bb8bde","d20d6d55-e1d9-462f-902a-31987fc17f06","d3bd5582-331f-4b89-96d8-d988dabaecd2","dab486f0-dfe1-46a8-b0d8-32e2a200b8e8","dc0f107c-d6af-40f2-b8fd-d6a8264071a5","ddada193-97b9-4ccc-8a51-bfbea77a0c06","e06bafea-36a4-40ac-8e47-2a2619fd46fd","e1bbca7c-14db-40cf-a128-0219f12466a3","e256486b-ee32-4d0f-9cba-d02bf4bd780a","e2f38cc3-06ff-4db2-8aad-a537c1e1d0c8","e500f58c-3afd-4143-b4d2-f60500bf9023","e57d61a5-e3ec-423d-ad96-243fbfae502b","e6d36e44-00e2-4f9e-95b1-e892e44117eb","e8fbbd18-0c64-4437-9ea9-4b4877081943","e9029bad-f0af-4178-8545-61b8bf20d98f","ea0bba2c-7a56-40f2-afac-00f638b54fc3","eb84cbb3-24d1-4565-9ec1-8bd3b9d4bec9","ec990258-7999-4c93-81af-59b6ab2c65df","ed2c35d4-102a-4b73-8382-2ac35610faed","efb7c5ac-4ac5-4964-80cb-f95ebaa0e04c","f1307eae-cbfb-4f04-b6cc-3facd9e296d6","f19a484a-77bd-4389-8266-523228328091","f1ba13f7-7414-47ce-9df3-a6aa0902c1b9","f24f8cd0-0ca1-49cf-8cf1-4a5e6b938fe3","f267ac1f-eff8-417a-8920-f8d37e384f79","f40851bc-e6e8-4605-ba83-f44d932b4760","f4c53608-9890-4b9f-89a3-7c1028bc1e05","f502d85e-d523-4b8c-9dec-469aa08204df","f62defd3-7975-4edf-8f34-40a36b487ac8","f6e3366d-13bc-4a60-94b6-f77a2c2032c0","f9720bd0-18fb-4774-96e6-eca25490f73e","fa93085f-260f-4f91-af1c-c85c03ca06fa","fdc662ec-5ed7-4d04-8993-6144ff01abc2","fe4e9bc0-2802-4dd8-97e4-27704fad2a1b","oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-156fd0980ec51fe6","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-7269f661e72c703f","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","oil-97103cc7b062d80c","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-c84820229ce8af05","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-fcda56b4bb45ffd3"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["prov:used"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:evidence-detection-and-provenance:prov-wasattributedto","name":"prov:wasAttributedTo","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":78,"article_count":56,"event_count":56,"article_ids":["04c00967-a247-4802-b3c2-3f266885c385","0a23e582-3dac-4091-bf36-a08d511a3763","0d96e6b1-57f6-4555-8711-703a6c818eea","0f7493be-b335-4851-9029-9e87ba0da155","10f36230-190b-4b13-8cfc-8d12c2f37080","18f4411e-1d84-42c5-835a-97436ad30c7c","1de65c17-36dd-4ba6-ada6-bcd98b556aad","1fe9639d-5c39-472e-94a7-73ac2b03bfce","22261df7-8974-447f-a1cf-192c59528f64","255ac21d-c17e-4926-9dad-13db7698ed72","2fe1bef6-e797-4d9f-bb5b-6f936d7a55dc","39a9fb26-817d-404e-a150-4e4c5ebc037c","39e61860-2a60-448c-838e-a7f01e4d0c5c","4469e268-1b01-49b7-a436-ea4a88ba6269","451d9824-7933-403d-beaa-1ac6398509c9","471bc3da-bbd4-417c-875a-595a713be7fd","4c67d899-fab5-4e78-9274-526d6a4fe0bb","4cd73621-691c-4866-91c1-0b99d0d1a89a","55552c00-e696-4ac2-951e-156364cb1337","5804b97c-c416-49d1-9fbd-5bb52c0595dd","62bc0e3c-1d90-4688-bc1b-e00f620c5c8c","6721b632-2b4f-492a-840d-bb05d2a9f1af","67c4a0dd-5f32-4dde-b733-4a4a9e5dfafb","73066633-67a8-4240-8c5a-3c4ae29b486d","747400a0-bfad-4fa2-8004-06f237d1c543","93c87fee-61ec-4ea8-bd4f-3434669835ee","944709d1-19c5-461e-a509-d35f5314cc8e","946d9238-09b9-474e-8481-5e734cedca7a","a18ba308-f8ab-4590-b466-daf80aa2b59c","b293dea5-f7e1-4889-a56d-f823569cdff4","bcd80071-6449-4036-accf-62939d2bc771","c4b35547-a0d3-4cad-b391-177ba64d7c63","c66f7c07-f922-4abd-8805-71a0fade560f","cd235f2c-1119-4002-b756-61e2983b0232","d18985ea-8239-498e-9147-eda1d0bb8bde","df6dd614-6785-4c3a-b6c7-1e091a751c64","e6f33250-4650-42ce-96e8-87ce7eebc853","ea27969f-7a0b-4e5c-9893-7763d5fdbfbf","ec990258-7999-4c93-81af-59b6ab2c65df","ef391115-fde1-44aa-ab00-abb8e2e7ec82","f1f602c9-64cd-4bfc-855c-fb8060a9c483","f319102d-533a-41ff-9f08-6bda6778bb7e","f5653eaf-7d13-4c91-93c7-e30daca2ec3a","f5c77efa-f72b-424c-a810-81cd552ba3de","fa1e38b4-4ced-4f4b-9a7b-b1b89ff13da7","fb4d21e7-be93-4775-905f-977427db28c4","fec4e8d2-6a2f-4046-b9d4-85a831f76655","oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-a0831d014f72baf3","oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","oil-c72d68cafd2478be","oil-c94e003c369b3450","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["prov:wasAttributedTo"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:evidence-detection-and-provenance:fflo-supportedby","name":"fflo:supportedBy","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":42,"article_count":36,"event_count":36,"article_ids":["0af3703f-23ec-4f8f-a1b6-45b4adb68b12","1933f8f5-8812-4e24-85bd-cdbdc83f929e","1c7ea343-020a-4266-9854-b12ebfa2cf50","29a173b3-4587-4257-9c93-2f0c483079c5","3797cfc4-05a5-422b-b823-ed3bb850f540","4299b01d-c5ab-4283-ae2d-31aa1fdbbfec","432f2c6e-3092-44cd-bf1b-54249b31ad6b","471bc3da-bbd4-417c-875a-595a713be7fd","47635cd8-696c-4adf-94ed-338f084a3d62","4c67d899-fab5-4e78-9274-526d6a4fe0bb","4cd73621-691c-4866-91c1-0b99d0d1a89a","5f6c5fd0-a2f8-4bfe-9ac4-a8d06bc8640a","5fa4530c-d60b-48c1-b6b2-371abff6d77a","60ccacb1-7c41-4259-b651-bfbf60e7b53a","71196507-ad87-406f-a4df-edc8a14b1575","75eac450-5d76-45da-975a-a47f1515ca01","81f9e1b1-71fd-45a2-9292-017420336059","83bf777b-6ee5-4e82-bd85-6e374853473a","867c2a12-155a-4309-aff0-300c6125824c","8eb102f2-a097-496b-8975-3d2cd6e31a8d","a06cd968-9dc5-42c5-a6e8-3d3c36dfc8c2","adad636e-6844-49cb-bb07-54ff4f1a044f","b4b614f7-a43d-4e57-9766-25f7fef90d68","c4b35547-a0d3-4cad-b391-177ba64d7c63","c66f7c07-f922-4abd-8805-71a0fade560f","c6e6e3f3-bc85-48dc-ad18-bb08d31d7308","cbdf7850-c12b-44e7-9a2a-2e88994f389f","d5ff3294-0ecd-48eb-b9dd-a2c0282a055a","dc0f107c-d6af-40f2-b8fd-d6a8264071a5","e57d61a5-e3ec-423d-ad96-243fbfae502b","e70df749-9305-44b3-8a30-defc332a7fa4","ea27969f-7a0b-4e5c-9893-7763d5fdbfbf","f5c77efa-f72b-424c-a810-81cd552ba3de","fa93085f-260f-4f91-af1c-c85c03ca06fa","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-a0831d014f72baf3"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:supportedBy"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:evidence-detection-and-provenance:fflo-identifies","name":"fflo:identifies","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":41,"article_count":33,"event_count":33,"article_ids":["0e464dfa-d504-4806-9005-c1ba38758bf8","1fe9639d-5c39-472e-94a7-73ac2b03bfce","26b11917-4e55-41d5-aeb1-64e8b44bedba","2c075e82-3fe3-4b95-a68a-f0fad41e51f5","4299b01d-c5ab-4283-ae2d-31aa1fdbbfec","445ff19b-5429-4a55-be3f-c4b03481b04f","4469e268-1b01-49b7-a436-ea4a88ba6269","471bc3da-bbd4-417c-875a-595a713be7fd","51a534c1-9193-4b8c-bbd2-b4e368930ead","5245dc0a-5d68-4a00-ad89-6255f3bee930","55552c00-e696-4ac2-951e-156364cb1337","58679f65-396b-4b1f-b725-9907ebc9f038","590fff58-7ba9-4a5b-8232-4c27d67f13b1","5f6c5fd0-a2f8-4bfe-9ac4-a8d06bc8640a","6721b632-2b4f-492a-840d-bb05d2a9f1af","79cfeedd-0cef-4026-962d-c86d241c4e56","7a707681-5edc-461c-b5a8-0057a374f3cc","7c914cb3-8ba1-4768-ac56-a051b75a6e8b","81f9e1b1-71fd-45a2-9292-017420336059","835cbabf-d424-4f04-89cb-1d8c0b08f1ab","867c2a12-155a-4309-aff0-300c6125824c","93c87fee-61ec-4ea8-bd4f-3434669835ee","94faca18-b471-4748-8bab-f399641cedbd","a06cd968-9dc5-42c5-a6e8-3d3c36dfc8c2","a3ce7cd2-ee71-42ce-b4f7-96a81c6bd295","c66f7c07-f922-4abd-8805-71a0fade560f","caae3943-065a-475a-a6fe-f5706ce3db97","dc9b6179-78d1-4eec-9df7-47aadc6c4002","e2f38cc3-06ff-4db2-8aad-a537c1e1d0c8","e6e7e00b-0ede-4741-8419-066a93e431cd","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-846611108e27fafb","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:identifies"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:evidence-detection-and-provenance:fflo-detectedby","name":"fflo:detectedBy","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":37,"article_count":27,"event_count":27,"article_ids":["0a113e2a-26d3-45e4-9064-7cfa2f39230b","3f674523-5416-4b89-8cab-fe3ddf3c9e7e","411b1d1a-7b18-4425-90f0-da2c296625eb","5245dc0a-5d68-4a00-ad89-6255f3bee930","67c4a0dd-5f32-4dde-b733-4a4a9e5dfafb","6ee56cf3-78f2-4420-bede-08f76397b2fb","7855cb39-b177-4d3b-bd72-0a18afd5415b","79cfeedd-0cef-4026-962d-c86d241c4e56","7b3b345d-0902-4461-a6bc-747c26feb7f2","81f9e1b1-71fd-45a2-9292-017420336059","8b1ef2e6-f7a2-4db0-9589-42159cf06574","9285d418-e4e3-40a1-b1d1-da857748bfd3","9d92713b-a9c4-4b7e-87f4-c4fd443e38b5","9fe3b91d-3719-4260-926a-d5711bd1efc4","adfa4015-b34e-4488-99e4-b20b4dc10324","b293dea5-f7e1-4889-a56d-f823569cdff4","ce0c52be-896a-479c-b92b-09bf3518d332","d11fa038-1162-4d93-9df5-6d5b35b8628b","d405b9b8-3fd3-4230-a3d3-ccdd34abd185","e1955bc5-123d-4ca0-b875-2d75b1f718f1","e57d61a5-e3ec-423d-ad96-243fbfae502b","eac2c9bd-6ddc-48dc-92e0-405c318acfb0","f1ba13f7-7414-47ce-9df3-a6aa0902c1b9","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-d276b566dce62194","oil-d7ec006e22e070de"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:detectedBy"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:evidence-detection-and-provenance:fflo-producesindicator","name":"fflo:producesIndicator","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":80,"article_count":24,"event_count":24,"article_ids":["0109eea0-3adc-4177-a6f7-e3bc31bf237d","0a113e2a-26d3-45e4-9064-7cfa2f39230b","178d6244-50cd-4bea-8e16-f951f6227a8c","3f674523-5416-4b89-8cab-fe3ddf3c9e7e","5118358f-2777-4bfd-a761-adb4bc1da763","550bda80-b5be-488a-89f6-64b9698b4033","67c4a0dd-5f32-4dde-b733-4a4a9e5dfafb","6901ef7b-f98a-4b3a-b622-85196fe10ffb","7855cb39-b177-4d3b-bd72-0a18afd5415b","79cfeedd-0cef-4026-962d-c86d241c4e56","905b10d3-5531-40bc-b5e3-84beb79f1af2","920f5e05-04f9-4545-b26d-ea48a1f18a2f","96adc5c1-5a68-473e-9d38-85bed792c8fc","9bd6a50e-945d-42d4-88de-97e83b4c3b06","9fe3b91d-3719-4260-926a-d5711bd1efc4","cfa001c3-f0fc-45cd-8a71-3e35d2026e1f","e446ef0a-2a74-42bf-bcd6-2b793506650e","edf6b48c-90dc-4757-814e-999556997808","oil-63426d939d718e7f","oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","oil-c94e003c369b3450","oil-d276b566dce62194","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:producesIndicator"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:evidence-detection-and-provenance:prov-wasgeneratedby","name":"prov:wasGeneratedBy","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":11,"article_count":10,"event_count":10,"article_ids":["1df33743-1016-49ce-981b-862125c0893f","2fe1bef6-e797-4d9f-bb5b-6f936d7a55dc","3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","43de8661-2844-46b7-bb39-15eb17f6b82e","590fff58-7ba9-4a5b-8232-4c27d67f13b1","696bb9a6-aa69-4de4-a566-5df21482bc51","944709d1-19c5-461e-a509-d35f5314cc8e","b4a8aa1a-7262-4318-9579-9fff20f959a6","d301dc8a-7194-46ad-bf04-43efdc78c053","ed2c35d4-102a-4b73-8382-2ac35610faed"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["prov:wasGeneratedBy"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:evidence-detection-and-provenance:fflo-confirmedby","name":"fflo:confirmedBy","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":5,"article_count":5,"event_count":5,"article_ids":["26b11917-4e55-41d5-aeb1-64e8b44bedba","3624ed70-d464-4caa-9b4e-4dfc2ed435dc","93c87fee-61ec-4ea8-bd4f-3434669835ee","bcd80071-6449-4036-accf-62939d2bc771","oil-2f0a177eecae442b"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:confirmedBy"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:evidence-detection-and-provenance:fflo-hasvalue","name":"fflo:hasValue","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["d156577c-5001-4f1b-90f7-d7b21a37497b","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:hasValue"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:evidence-detection-and-provenance:fso-isresultof","name":"fso:isResultOf","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-4d6bfb72c0733299"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fso:isResultOf"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:evidence-detection-and-provenance:prov-wasinfluencedby","name":"prov:wasInfluencedBy","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["e500f58c-3afd-4143-b4d2-f60500bf9023"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["prov:wasInfluencedBy"]}]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:group:location-and-supply-chain","name":"Location and supply chain","definition":"Relationships linking a claim to place, region, production, or supply-chain stage.","occurrences":679,"article_count":333,"event_count":333,"article_ids":["008cc0e4-d7d7-475f-80d8-d81621e7b862","05375704-5b45-4e0a-b388-9944c0c5fc9f","0932679a-fe82-4a1e-949e-9d4fd17ed2a0","0a113e2a-26d3-45e4-9064-7cfa2f39230b","0a23e582-3dac-4091-bf36-a08d511a3763","0a342064-5378-4aff-b4aa-34ae5c1ab66b","0aa842b8-1ac9-4243-a8b6-5d98d32d6089","0b5a50e0-df3b-42ea-83c6-80bc16cf39fb","0d96e6b1-57f6-4555-8711-703a6c818eea","0e464dfa-d504-4806-9005-c1ba38758bf8","0e518ac8-dc53-4c79-938a-bd26c1142eeb","0f7493be-b335-4851-9029-9e87ba0da155","0facca96-d90c-4f21-ba98-356f7f6b1622","102a4953-33a2-4842-827e-987e3bb6ce7a","10f36230-190b-4b13-8cfc-8d12c2f37080","141518ef-ce68-4969-bb2a-66f56733fab2","178d6244-50cd-4bea-8e16-f951f6227a8c","18f4411e-1d84-42c5-835a-97436ad30c7c","1931e9b4-edf1-42ec-a9c4-00ff0cbcff9a","1933f8f5-8812-4e24-85bd-cdbdc83f929e","194f3e22-f4b6-483b-9333-762c3a3b6b9d","1a066d87-0093-4ca8-9c10-84c004b76c48","1a87f314-ec7e-4407-96f2-0995e8d26fc0","1ae756d4-675e-4a08-bc7d-ba6a3e922d5d","1c7ea343-020a-4266-9854-b12ebfa2cf50","1c8fe57c-2cee-4f73-a5f3-6ee4051024e7","1de65c17-36dd-4ba6-ada6-bcd98b556aad","1fe9639d-5c39-472e-94a7-73ac2b03bfce","2010c6e2-c9cb-4a3e-b22b-8cabf1044074","21fb2b00-9b86-4924-9a0d-248f976cfd93","22261df7-8974-447f-a1cf-192c59528f64","23ff1efe-782a-4174-8f33-41a3ff0e8c44","2499d49c-748f-41d8-84d9-eed7a66ad43a","255ac21d-c17e-4926-9dad-13db7698ed72","2679a7a3-abde-4979-ac6e-5cf24113e0db","268e5866-7aea-4546-934f-f105a70b1096","26ac5726-fd69-42b8-a80e-6a71b91ba466","26b11917-4e55-41d5-aeb1-64e8b44bedba","2719a94d-d523-4fef-bfd9-a1bef16dd951","28a03096-e60c-4adb-b4fa-55f0bd28a95d","292b562c-132b-47cc-9030-d2544e801e7e","29a173b3-4587-4257-9c93-2f0c483079c5","2ad1f047-985c-4c59-aa13-749fa75bcba9","2b442757-da6a-46e5-ae37-b083e00062d3","2c075e82-3fe3-4b95-a68a-f0fad41e51f5","2fe1bef6-e797-4d9f-bb5b-6f936d7a55dc","2fede3c0-46a7-46e8-a776-5a6fd6d3f08e","301bb818-ff44-4346-9ffe-ad58bf13cfb2","31cae76c-aa62-4328-bd40-368275f60e9f","3278338f-1fa0-4045-9701-e237d5ad0930","33326887-4ed0-4562-a0ac-b889d6ad53a9","336a89c4-d98a-4242-8803-4d479689bc4d","34dc1c1f-d12c-4230-bb1c-e41b6961f288","3624ed70-d464-4caa-9b4e-4dfc2ed435dc","368930a7-2085-43bd-bb79-62d471c9e75c","36a70fc6-de5a-494c-9dc5-801fe7a7a53d","3797cfc4-05a5-422b-b823-ed3bb850f540","3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","38d24327-d93d-472b-99ac-246351c7dbfd","39a9fb26-817d-404e-a150-4e4c5ebc037c","3c0e9d23-f858-47eb-8e7a-23db1d42822a","3d6b98eb-c79e-460c-883b-9c997ffea009","3e325b99-7611-4f89-8963-7f79c5ac4105","4216dab3-b436-422a-a6ee-74b5858f7aa2","4299b01d-c5ab-4283-ae2d-31aa1fdbbfec","438c4f31-19bd-4ff3-bed4-035569ec6cbf","43de8661-2844-46b7-bb39-15eb17f6b82e","43e20f96-27cb-4f67-b7e5-6228aea8e7b6","4469e268-1b01-49b7-a436-ea4a88ba6269","45fdd40d-5bc4-4fe7-9eb9-883c55f14a70","4661fe17-e88d-41ab-a8c6-9aefcbbaed5c","471bc3da-bbd4-417c-875a-595a713be7fd","4726ed7e-d61a-4a2c-9e05-59cbaa4f1bf0","4a021f95-539e-4217-98a0-d651be9a3b47","4a638904-2bcf-4037-8afd-ec6e5b0b6b11","4cd73621-691c-4866-91c1-0b99d0d1a89a","4d6ab7d0-4e16-4d1b-aa49-7f453c9352b6","4d7063c6-5201-4ce1-89ed-75ee21d51b98","4eb18b90-e310-48db-9531-68b146420749","4fa075c9-a30f-47e5-8f09-158017bfd6d6","502ff9a1-ac00-4ef2-96cb-0a0614085766","504dd102-6089-4fcb-a066-0006720862a7","508d009a-650f-4e40-b03d-ebef9d2c069e","5118358f-2777-4bfd-a761-adb4bc1da763","51a534c1-9193-4b8c-bbd2-b4e368930ead","5245dc0a-5d68-4a00-ad89-6255f3bee930","526515f5-4a82-4b0b-9e1c-7f3a2aa4cde4","534ab39c-32c3-46ea-a742-5095170a0003","5374dadc-cd7f-41df-b8d9-8ef7c10ec693","5406e730-2d78-47b4-ba27-fc933e691eab","54637d34-f16e-4e98-84c1-681a0fca559c","54686005-b842-4cc5-82b1-0276e36a42b6","550bda80-b5be-488a-89f6-64b9698b4033","58679f65-396b-4b1f-b725-9907ebc9f038","590fff58-7ba9-4a5b-8232-4c27d67f13b1","5a7bde0b-59e0-4f86-9b63-2bbebb593d41","5f6c5fd0-a2f8-4bfe-9ac4-a8d06bc8640a","5fa4530c-d60b-48c1-b6b2-371abff6d77a","60ccacb1-7c41-4259-b651-bfbf60e7b53a","66bb816a-1961-4e45-8460-9328304c7956","6721b632-2b4f-492a-840d-bb05d2a9f1af","672ecfdb-cb9d-485d-8fc1-76e6a8269fe7","67c4a0dd-5f32-4dde-b733-4a4a9e5dfafb","6cf864fb-5956-4416-a1c5-f42153e66ec4","6f4adcf4-c63b-41c9-b7f6-0b0f4e75c857","706f0136-7ae5-45f2-b804-e3a8c9a14d1c","70b9c7ef-3983-40dd-b904-5607537ff37f","71196507-ad87-406f-a4df-edc8a14b1575","73369c4a-c44b-4b7a-b3cc-07766ccb4e2a","73e97a89-5b5f-4104-bc6a-50b8f564040a","747400a0-bfad-4fa2-8004-06f237d1c543","75f7eb04-35fe-48ce-af4a-d0ccf3067076","77ed2567-2595-48f0-891b-a753164f2866","79cfeedd-0cef-4026-962d-c86d241c4e56","79f059b8-00b2-4345-ad46-440c7bc371df","7a539249-77a2-4e2b-a29f-6952304d80d7","7a707681-5edc-461c-b5a8-0057a374f3cc","7b3b345d-0902-4461-a6bc-747c26feb7f2","7c914cb3-8ba1-4768-ac56-a051b75a6e8b","7ddc7283-670a-4dfb-9e38-a11aa0c579c2","8151434e-f600-47a9-93df-16b483e88961","816a43e1-6b33-4a27-a385-9d12dd8e924f","8187d86e-f46c-4e26-8188-a4e7b31de2f6","81f9e1b1-71fd-45a2-9292-017420336059","824601ea-5309-4ddf-bc61-486c992e309c","83bf777b-6ee5-4e82-bd85-6e374853473a","84ea460e-bfc2-4977-aebb-32594a90693b","85680853-3899-4f21-b262-dbe3e8893779","8577ca11-d1ef-4517-846f-747a51b46f07","867c2a12-155a-4309-aff0-300c6125824c","86b559ac-3645-468b-9f43-7d961bd255d7","892c7a97-bb6b-47a5-9402-8a5293acf25b","897c7de9-ed19-4ee2-a2d5-85b75355519d","89e1831f-7c8d-46ad-b545-7b0e141b1fa7","8aaa4093-987c-4a1d-8fbd-8e1d1e495fe3","905b10d3-5531-40bc-b5e3-84beb79f1af2","920f5e05-04f9-4545-b26d-ea48a1f18a2f","9285d418-e4e3-40a1-b1d1-da857748bfd3","92b301e8-97fb-47a7-94a6-b858beb0a1fb","9368fe71-a18d-4580-8063-8e3f17e6cec9","93c87fee-61ec-4ea8-bd4f-3434669835ee","944709d1-19c5-461e-a509-d35f5314cc8e","946d9238-09b9-474e-8481-5e734cedca7a","948eda84-20a8-442d-8a0a-ffba051904a4","94d114b9-3c47-468e-8714-ed449f90e8e4","94faca18-b471-4748-8bab-f399641cedbd","96621df7-0c9b-41e5-a5a6-3f21a24613d5","97c9d44f-1ca4-489d-a786-dc23f1fe1175","980db746-8492-4784-ab7e-f6c3b10378e1","9849e210-d94b-448b-885e-7bdffe11cfe9","9bd6a50e-945d-42d4-88de-97e83b4c3b06","9c74f902-2ef0-4269-b436-acc19aa11ea5","9cbf8104-4fa2-4365-bc32-09eb2d1c9381","9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","9d92713b-a9c4-4b7e-87f4-c4fd443e38b5","9fe3b91d-3719-4260-926a-d5711bd1efc4","a06cd968-9dc5-42c5-a6e8-3d3c36dfc8c2","a18ba308-f8ab-4590-b466-daf80aa2b59c","a3ce7cd2-ee71-42ce-b4f7-96a81c6bd295","a6385d09-ca9d-4f95-b5ba-4f50630bec35","a7002128-c4bc-48cd-bed1-46a529e69132","a9c15856-f188-45d4-80a8-7929118af59a","ab7d0ab2-d774-415c-bd3f-a606f92ef3c3","ac5e071a-48a2-4a53-a1f6-5fc7b6d35280","adad636e-6844-49cb-bb07-54ff4f1a044f","add15855-56e0-4264-819c-b8e8110846aa","aed9cf49-b6d3-4952-8acb-37e1eae1c31a","b3e58970-8bf0-4e37-a8f9-dd4fce60bf46","b4a8aa1a-7262-4318-9579-9fff20f959a6","b4b614f7-a43d-4e57-9766-25f7fef90d68","b556af30-b2db-4273-8b3b-a5b1ec113ebb","b55fc156-b5e6-49b6-b4f1-e092d3b4f553","b5940660-7f58-4123-bb25-6f78d4e1694d","b6a4c3c9-311e-4a4f-beaf-d0012bbfbf51","bcd183c8-344e-4cb8-8561-8c2e6a027897","bf5cf44c-c3df-4c9c-b13b-8a0108b8a106","c2875090-e4c1-4cec-be8a-7218c8774f6b","c349f006-e1f4-498e-970a-626a724e2231","c3aa82e4-0707-4514-a535-22d6d4a7f0b2","c4b35547-a0d3-4cad-b391-177ba64d7c63","c5597192-fe4a-479a-8bf7-cdcf15d74d10","c66f7c07-f922-4abd-8805-71a0fade560f","c6dcef79-69bf-47eb-a0b5-7b4d6bef00fc","c6e1c64f-1094-4a24-9d3e-8103fb4d94ab","c6e6e3f3-bc85-48dc-ad18-bb08d31d7308","c7803b74-2f5d-47d0-a09e-c27ed98ec1a3","c7af7c66-9a6d-42c8-8695-bcd164ed856b","c999d71f-777d-4d80-9f37-37391f97acd4","caae3943-065a-475a-a6fe-f5706ce3db97","cb333cad-a0a7-4971-8f06-e4ca49e58c39","cd235f2c-1119-4002-b756-61e2983b0232","cfa001c3-f0fc-45cd-8a71-3e35d2026e1f","cfd3be60-c380-4a63-8e12-5fd8af9b72bd","d2c92cf6-2a73-4e89-adff-db3cb523f8e1","d2f303e3-c25c-412f-8ae4-4ec525f68736","d315d00d-a3eb-4c0f-9554-c1395585910f","d3c6617c-2925-40b2-aa72-9b0b6c5e83d4","d5ff3294-0ecd-48eb-b9dd-a2c0282a055a","d6f9dd1e-cee9-48ff-a7e7-71d7a7b8f61d","d8ab6193-0742-4b7e-99ea-f1131b5fc36f","d96f8ae8-4753-4f7b-9ec5-3238eca05841","d9794536-257f-4a12-8d46-a7c0c649fb97","db8eb9e3-f6e6-4be4-b6d2-d135a6c3e9ac","dc9b6179-78d1-4eec-9df7-47aadc6c4002","dd99547d-81d1-4764-ba78-52a1cddf906d","df6dd614-6785-4c3a-b6c7-1e091a751c64","e06bafea-36a4-40ac-8e47-2a2619fd46fd","e1bbca7c-14db-40cf-a128-0219f12466a3","e2f38cc3-06ff-4db2-8aad-a537c1e1d0c8","e4aba04c-81ff-438c-a506-881ff2436c82","e500f58c-3afd-4143-b4d2-f60500bf9023","e6d36e44-00e2-4f9e-95b1-e892e44117eb","e6e7e00b-0ede-4741-8419-066a93e431cd","e6f33250-4650-42ce-96e8-87ce7eebc853","e70df749-9305-44b3-8a30-defc332a7fa4","e9029bad-f0af-4178-8545-61b8bf20d98f","ea51c75b-4b85-48fb-bbb7-8fde23c110aa","ea6c8861-7a39-4e19-8e71-58720131fa8d","eac2c9bd-6ddc-48dc-92e0-405c318acfb0","eb84cbb3-24d1-4565-9ec1-8bd3b9d4bec9","ec990258-7999-4c93-81af-59b6ab2c65df","ed2c35d4-102a-4b73-8382-2ac35610faed","edf6b48c-90dc-4757-814e-999556997808","ef391115-fde1-44aa-ab00-abb8e2e7ec82","f1307eae-cbfb-4f04-b6cc-3facd9e296d6","f19a484a-77bd-4389-8266-523228328091","f24f8cd0-0ca1-49cf-8cf1-4a5e6b938fe3","f25f2d19-18b4-4e7e-ad7b-8f30a193b3d6","f267ac1f-eff8-417a-8920-f8d37e384f79","f289c668-0c40-41e6-82af-ae6829b262d4","f319102d-533a-41ff-9f08-6bda6778bb7e","f40851bc-e6e8-4605-ba83-f44d932b4760","f4c53608-9890-4b9f-89a3-7c1028bc1e05","f502d85e-d523-4b8c-9dec-469aa08204df","f5653eaf-7d13-4c91-93c7-e30daca2ec3a","f5876a8c-263e-4134-a5b2-ba2453ed9080","f58af8d2-a271-4586-b2b4-1b399c9f84de","f5c77efa-f72b-424c-a810-81cd552ba3de","f9720bd0-18fb-4774-96e6-eca25490f73e","fa1e38b4-4ced-4f4b-9a7b-b1b89ff13da7","faaca14c-514a-4f25-897a-cd9bbc31d5d0","fb4d21e7-be93-4775-905f-977427db28c4","fdc662ec-5ed7-4d04-8993-6144ff01abc2","fec4e8d2-6a2f-4046-b9d4-85a831f76655","oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-055a850c7fce9512","oil-05aa031a4b58524e","oil-081117bbf714a215","oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-0d7b13a282f9b466","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","oil-13fd5c31e278a577","oil-1852e8a212bd5903","oil-1c3f4e35a1252449","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-23d97461886d2622","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-438415c185832786","oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-7269f661e72c703f","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-7ed3f9582cae741d","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-846611108e27fafb","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-9c21da748413e6f9","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-a9685f88d15906f6","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","oil-bd1df718191f8f6e","oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","oil-c2fa50179af284f7","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-c72d68cafd2478be","oil-c94e003c369b3450","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-d276b566dce62194","oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","oil-e72f16ac2686175c","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f1693a0670f7b784","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-f96a10806285c261","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-fba2e5ff157abb74","oil-fc5474312cf8529f","oil-fc714f38909e4348","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"entries":[{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:location-and-supply-chain:fflo-foundat","name":"fflo:foundAt","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":218,"article_count":152,"event_count":152,"article_ids":["008cc0e4-d7d7-475f-80d8-d81621e7b862","05375704-5b45-4e0a-b388-9944c0c5fc9f","0a342064-5378-4aff-b4aa-34ae5c1ab66b","0aa842b8-1ac9-4243-a8b6-5d98d32d6089","0b5a50e0-df3b-42ea-83c6-80bc16cf39fb","0d96e6b1-57f6-4555-8711-703a6c818eea","0e464dfa-d504-4806-9005-c1ba38758bf8","0e518ac8-dc53-4c79-938a-bd26c1142eeb","0f7493be-b335-4851-9029-9e87ba0da155","0facca96-d90c-4f21-ba98-356f7f6b1622","141518ef-ce68-4969-bb2a-66f56733fab2","18f4411e-1d84-42c5-835a-97436ad30c7c","1933f8f5-8812-4e24-85bd-cdbdc83f929e","1a066d87-0093-4ca8-9c10-84c004b76c48","1ae756d4-675e-4a08-bc7d-ba6a3e922d5d","1c8fe57c-2cee-4f73-a5f3-6ee4051024e7","2010c6e2-c9cb-4a3e-b22b-8cabf1044074","22261df7-8974-447f-a1cf-192c59528f64","2499d49c-748f-41d8-84d9-eed7a66ad43a","268e5866-7aea-4546-934f-f105a70b1096","2ad1f047-985c-4c59-aa13-749fa75bcba9","2fede3c0-46a7-46e8-a776-5a6fd6d3f08e","31cae76c-aa62-4328-bd40-368275f60e9f","3278338f-1fa0-4045-9701-e237d5ad0930","33326887-4ed0-4562-a0ac-b889d6ad53a9","336a89c4-d98a-4242-8803-4d479689bc4d","34dc1c1f-d12c-4230-bb1c-e41b6961f288","3624ed70-d464-4caa-9b4e-4dfc2ed435dc","36a70fc6-de5a-494c-9dc5-801fe7a7a53d","3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","3c0e9d23-f858-47eb-8e7a-23db1d42822a","4216dab3-b436-422a-a6ee-74b5858f7aa2","43de8661-2844-46b7-bb39-15eb17f6b82e","43e20f96-27cb-4f67-b7e5-6228aea8e7b6","4469e268-1b01-49b7-a436-ea4a88ba6269","4661fe17-e88d-41ab-a8c6-9aefcbbaed5c","4726ed7e-d61a-4a2c-9e05-59cbaa4f1bf0","4a021f95-539e-4217-98a0-d651be9a3b47","4a638904-2bcf-4037-8afd-ec6e5b0b6b11","4fa075c9-a30f-47e5-8f09-158017bfd6d6","502ff9a1-ac00-4ef2-96cb-0a0614085766","504dd102-6089-4fcb-a066-0006720862a7","508d009a-650f-4e40-b03d-ebef9d2c069e","526515f5-4a82-4b0b-9e1c-7f3a2aa4cde4","5406e730-2d78-47b4-ba27-fc933e691eab","54637d34-f16e-4e98-84c1-681a0fca559c","54686005-b842-4cc5-82b1-0276e36a42b6","550bda80-b5be-488a-89f6-64b9698b4033","58679f65-396b-4b1f-b725-9907ebc9f038","590fff58-7ba9-4a5b-8232-4c27d67f13b1","5a7bde0b-59e0-4f86-9b63-2bbebb593d41","5fa4530c-d60b-48c1-b6b2-371abff6d77a","60ccacb1-7c41-4259-b651-bfbf60e7b53a","672ecfdb-cb9d-485d-8fc1-76e6a8269fe7","6f4adcf4-c63b-41c9-b7f6-0b0f4e75c857","70b9c7ef-3983-40dd-b904-5607537ff37f","73e97a89-5b5f-4104-bc6a-50b8f564040a","77ed2567-2595-48f0-891b-a753164f2866","8151434e-f600-47a9-93df-16b483e88961","8187d86e-f46c-4e26-8188-a4e7b31de2f6","824601ea-5309-4ddf-bc61-486c992e309c","83bf777b-6ee5-4e82-bd85-6e374853473a","8577ca11-d1ef-4517-846f-747a51b46f07","867c2a12-155a-4309-aff0-300c6125824c","86b559ac-3645-468b-9f43-7d961bd255d7","892c7a97-bb6b-47a5-9402-8a5293acf25b","897c7de9-ed19-4ee2-a2d5-85b75355519d","8aaa4093-987c-4a1d-8fbd-8e1d1e495fe3","905b10d3-5531-40bc-b5e3-84beb79f1af2","920f5e05-04f9-4545-b26d-ea48a1f18a2f","92b301e8-97fb-47a7-94a6-b858beb0a1fb","944709d1-19c5-461e-a509-d35f5314cc8e","94d114b9-3c47-468e-8714-ed449f90e8e4","94faca18-b471-4748-8bab-f399641cedbd","980db746-8492-4784-ab7e-f6c3b10378e1","9849e210-d94b-448b-885e-7bdffe11cfe9","9c74f902-2ef0-4269-b436-acc19aa11ea5","9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","a06cd968-9dc5-42c5-a6e8-3d3c36dfc8c2","a6385d09-ca9d-4f95-b5ba-4f50630bec35","a9c15856-f188-45d4-80a8-7929118af59a","ac5e071a-48a2-4a53-a1f6-5fc7b6d35280","aed9cf49-b6d3-4952-8acb-37e1eae1c31a","b3e58970-8bf0-4e37-a8f9-dd4fce60bf46","b55fc156-b5e6-49b6-b4f1-e092d3b4f553","b6a4c3c9-311e-4a4f-beaf-d0012bbfbf51","bcd183c8-344e-4cb8-8561-8c2e6a027897","c2875090-e4c1-4cec-be8a-7218c8774f6b","c349f006-e1f4-498e-970a-626a724e2231","c3aa82e4-0707-4514-a535-22d6d4a7f0b2","c6dcef79-69bf-47eb-a0b5-7b4d6bef00fc","c6e1c64f-1094-4a24-9d3e-8103fb4d94ab","c6e6e3f3-bc85-48dc-ad18-bb08d31d7308","c7af7c66-9a6d-42c8-8695-bcd164ed856b","c999d71f-777d-4d80-9f37-37391f97acd4","caae3943-065a-475a-a6fe-f5706ce3db97","cb333cad-a0a7-4971-8f06-e4ca49e58c39","cd235f2c-1119-4002-b756-61e2983b0232","d2c92cf6-2a73-4e89-adff-db3cb523f8e1","d2f303e3-c25c-412f-8ae4-4ec525f68736","d315d00d-a3eb-4c0f-9554-c1395585910f","d6f9dd1e-cee9-48ff-a7e7-71d7a7b8f61d","d96f8ae8-4753-4f7b-9ec5-3238eca05841","d9794536-257f-4a12-8d46-a7c0c649fb97","df6dd614-6785-4c3a-b6c7-1e091a751c64","e06bafea-36a4-40ac-8e47-2a2619fd46fd","e1bbca7c-14db-40cf-a128-0219f12466a3","e500f58c-3afd-4143-b4d2-f60500bf9023","e70df749-9305-44b3-8a30-defc332a7fa4","ea51c75b-4b85-48fb-bbb7-8fde23c110aa","ea6c8861-7a39-4e19-8e71-58720131fa8d","eac2c9bd-6ddc-48dc-92e0-405c318acfb0","eb84cbb3-24d1-4565-9ec1-8bd3b9d4bec9","edf6b48c-90dc-4757-814e-999556997808","f1307eae-cbfb-4f04-b6cc-3facd9e296d6","f19a484a-77bd-4389-8266-523228328091","f24f8cd0-0ca1-49cf-8cf1-4a5e6b938fe3","f25f2d19-18b4-4e7e-ad7b-8f30a193b3d6","f289c668-0c40-41e6-82af-ae6829b262d4","f319102d-533a-41ff-9f08-6bda6778bb7e","f40851bc-e6e8-4605-ba83-f44d932b4760","f4c53608-9890-4b9f-89a3-7c1028bc1e05","f502d85e-d523-4b8c-9dec-469aa08204df","f5653eaf-7d13-4c91-93c7-e30daca2ec3a","f9720bd0-18fb-4774-96e6-eca25490f73e","fb4d21e7-be93-4775-905f-977427db28c4","fdc662ec-5ed7-4d04-8993-6144ff01abc2","oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-0536bbfbc5745875","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-9c21da748413e6f9","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba","oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-f138f57de764f810","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:foundAt"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:location-and-supply-chain:fflo-foundatstep","name":"fflo:foundAtStep","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":131,"article_count":101,"event_count":101,"article_ids":["05375704-5b45-4e0a-b388-9944c0c5fc9f","0932679a-fe82-4a1e-949e-9d4fd17ed2a0","0a23e582-3dac-4091-bf36-a08d511a3763","18f4411e-1d84-42c5-835a-97436ad30c7c","194f3e22-f4b6-483b-9333-762c3a3b6b9d","1a066d87-0093-4ca8-9c10-84c004b76c48","1fe9639d-5c39-472e-94a7-73ac2b03bfce","2679a7a3-abde-4979-ac6e-5cf24113e0db","26ac5726-fd69-42b8-a80e-6a71b91ba466","26b11917-4e55-41d5-aeb1-64e8b44bedba","292b562c-132b-47cc-9030-d2544e801e7e","2b442757-da6a-46e5-ae37-b083e00062d3","301bb818-ff44-4346-9ffe-ad58bf13cfb2","336a89c4-d98a-4242-8803-4d479689bc4d","3797cfc4-05a5-422b-b823-ed3bb850f540","3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","38d24327-d93d-472b-99ac-246351c7dbfd","3e325b99-7611-4f89-8963-7f79c5ac4105","471bc3da-bbd4-417c-875a-595a713be7fd","4d7063c6-5201-4ce1-89ed-75ee21d51b98","54686005-b842-4cc5-82b1-0276e36a42b6","590fff58-7ba9-4a5b-8232-4c27d67f13b1","66bb816a-1961-4e45-8460-9328304c7956","672ecfdb-cb9d-485d-8fc1-76e6a8269fe7","67c4a0dd-5f32-4dde-b733-4a4a9e5dfafb","71196507-ad87-406f-a4df-edc8a14b1575","73369c4a-c44b-4b7a-b3cc-07766ccb4e2a","747400a0-bfad-4fa2-8004-06f237d1c543","79cfeedd-0cef-4026-962d-c86d241c4e56","816a43e1-6b33-4a27-a385-9d12dd8e924f","8577ca11-d1ef-4517-846f-747a51b46f07","89e1831f-7c8d-46ad-b545-7b0e141b1fa7","9285d418-e4e3-40a1-b1d1-da857748bfd3","944709d1-19c5-461e-a509-d35f5314cc8e","948eda84-20a8-442d-8a0a-ffba051904a4","94d114b9-3c47-468e-8714-ed449f90e8e4","96621df7-0c9b-41e5-a5a6-3f21a24613d5","97c9d44f-1ca4-489d-a786-dc23f1fe1175","9c74f902-2ef0-4269-b436-acc19aa11ea5","9cbf8104-4fa2-4365-bc32-09eb2d1c9381","9d92713b-a9c4-4b7e-87f4-c4fd443e38b5","a18ba308-f8ab-4590-b466-daf80aa2b59c","b556af30-b2db-4273-8b3b-a5b1ec113ebb","b55fc156-b5e6-49b6-b4f1-e092d3b4f553","b6a4c3c9-311e-4a4f-beaf-d0012bbfbf51","bf5cf44c-c3df-4c9c-b13b-8a0108b8a106","c5597192-fe4a-479a-8bf7-cdcf15d74d10","c6dcef79-69bf-47eb-a0b5-7b4d6bef00fc","c7803b74-2f5d-47d0-a09e-c27ed98ec1a3","caae3943-065a-475a-a6fe-f5706ce3db97","cfd3be60-c380-4a63-8e12-5fd8af9b72bd","d3c6617c-2925-40b2-aa72-9b0b6c5e83d4","e2f38cc3-06ff-4db2-8aad-a537c1e1d0c8","e4aba04c-81ff-438c-a506-881ff2436c82","e6e7e00b-0ede-4741-8419-066a93e431cd","e6f33250-4650-42ce-96e8-87ce7eebc853","ea6c8861-7a39-4e19-8e71-58720131fa8d","eac2c9bd-6ddc-48dc-92e0-405c318acfb0","eb84cbb3-24d1-4565-9ec1-8bd3b9d4bec9","ec990258-7999-4c93-81af-59b6ab2c65df","ef391115-fde1-44aa-ab00-abb8e2e7ec82","f1307eae-cbfb-4f04-b6cc-3facd9e296d6","f267ac1f-eff8-417a-8920-f8d37e384f79","f58af8d2-a271-4586-b2b4-1b399c9f84de","fa1e38b4-4ced-4f4b-9a7b-b1b89ff13da7","faaca14c-514a-4f25-897a-cd9bbc31d5d0","oil-028241dff8c29c89","oil-055a850c7fce9512","oil-081117bbf714a215","oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","oil-13fd5c31e278a577","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-a9685f88d15906f6","oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","oil-c2fa50179af284f7","oil-c72d68cafd2478be","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-e72f16ac2686175c","oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","oil-f1693a0670f7b784","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-fba2e5ff157abb74","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:foundAtStep"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:location-and-supply-chain:fflo-inregion","name":"fflo:inRegion","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":113,"article_count":90,"event_count":90,"article_ids":["0a23e582-3dac-4091-bf36-a08d511a3763","0b5a50e0-df3b-42ea-83c6-80bc16cf39fb","0f7493be-b335-4851-9029-9e87ba0da155","141518ef-ce68-4969-bb2a-66f56733fab2","1931e9b4-edf1-42ec-a9c4-00ff0cbcff9a","1a066d87-0093-4ca8-9c10-84c004b76c48","1fe9639d-5c39-472e-94a7-73ac2b03bfce","2010c6e2-c9cb-4a3e-b22b-8cabf1044074","21fb2b00-9b86-4924-9a0d-248f976cfd93","23ff1efe-782a-4174-8f33-41a3ff0e8c44","2679a7a3-abde-4979-ac6e-5cf24113e0db","26b11917-4e55-41d5-aeb1-64e8b44bedba","2719a94d-d523-4fef-bfd9-a1bef16dd951","2b442757-da6a-46e5-ae37-b083e00062d3","2fe1bef6-e797-4d9f-bb5b-6f936d7a55dc","31cae76c-aa62-4328-bd40-368275f60e9f","33326887-4ed0-4562-a0ac-b889d6ad53a9","336a89c4-d98a-4242-8803-4d479689bc4d","3624ed70-d464-4caa-9b4e-4dfc2ed435dc","368930a7-2085-43bd-bb79-62d471c9e75c","38d24327-d93d-472b-99ac-246351c7dbfd","39a9fb26-817d-404e-a150-4e4c5ebc037c","3e325b99-7611-4f89-8963-7f79c5ac4105","438c4f31-19bd-4ff3-bed4-035569ec6cbf","45fdd40d-5bc4-4fe7-9eb9-883c55f14a70","4726ed7e-d61a-4a2c-9e05-59cbaa4f1bf0","4a021f95-539e-4217-98a0-d651be9a3b47","5118358f-2777-4bfd-a761-adb4bc1da763","550bda80-b5be-488a-89f6-64b9698b4033","6721b632-2b4f-492a-840d-bb05d2a9f1af","706f0136-7ae5-45f2-b804-e3a8c9a14d1c","75f7eb04-35fe-48ce-af4a-d0ccf3067076","79f059b8-00b2-4345-ad46-440c7bc371df","7a707681-5edc-461c-b5a8-0057a374f3cc","7b3b345d-0902-4461-a6bc-747c26feb7f2","8187d86e-f46c-4e26-8188-a4e7b31de2f6","85680853-3899-4f21-b262-dbe3e8893779","89e1831f-7c8d-46ad-b545-7b0e141b1fa7","9368fe71-a18d-4580-8063-8e3f17e6cec9","948eda84-20a8-442d-8a0a-ffba051904a4","97c9d44f-1ca4-489d-a786-dc23f1fe1175","9bd6a50e-945d-42d4-88de-97e83b4c3b06","9c74f902-2ef0-4269-b436-acc19aa11ea5","9fe3b91d-3719-4260-926a-d5711bd1efc4","a6385d09-ca9d-4f95-b5ba-4f50630bec35","a7002128-c4bc-48cd-bed1-46a529e69132","add15855-56e0-4264-819c-b8e8110846aa","b4b614f7-a43d-4e57-9766-25f7fef90d68","b556af30-b2db-4273-8b3b-a5b1ec113ebb","c5597192-fe4a-479a-8bf7-cdcf15d74d10","cfd3be60-c380-4a63-8e12-5fd8af9b72bd","d9794536-257f-4a12-8d46-a7c0c649fb97","dc9b6179-78d1-4eec-9df7-47aadc6c4002","dd99547d-81d1-4764-ba78-52a1cddf906d","e1bbca7c-14db-40cf-a128-0219f12466a3","e9029bad-f0af-4178-8545-61b8bf20d98f","eac2c9bd-6ddc-48dc-92e0-405c318acfb0","ed2c35d4-102a-4b73-8382-2ac35610faed","f1307eae-cbfb-4f04-b6cc-3facd9e296d6","f5876a8c-263e-4134-a5b2-ba2453ed9080","f5c77efa-f72b-424c-a810-81cd552ba3de","f9720bd0-18fb-4774-96e6-eca25490f73e","fec4e8d2-6a2f-4046-b9d4-85a831f76655","oil-05aa031a4b58524e","oil-0d7b13a282f9b466","oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","oil-13fd5c31e278a577","oil-1852e8a212bd5903","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-23d97461886d2622","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-30270b1b4280233d","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-992710122346e1a9","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","oil-bd1df718191f8f6e","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-d276b566dce62194","oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-f96a10806285c261","oil-fc5474312cf8529f"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:inRegion"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:location-and-supply-chain:fflo-foundin","name":"fflo:foundIn","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":92,"article_count":74,"event_count":74,"article_ids":["0a113e2a-26d3-45e4-9064-7cfa2f39230b","0a23e582-3dac-4091-bf36-a08d511a3763","0f7493be-b335-4851-9029-9e87ba0da155","10f36230-190b-4b13-8cfc-8d12c2f37080","178d6244-50cd-4bea-8e16-f951f6227a8c","1a87f314-ec7e-4407-96f2-0995e8d26fc0","1c7ea343-020a-4266-9854-b12ebfa2cf50","1de65c17-36dd-4ba6-ada6-bcd98b556aad","1fe9639d-5c39-472e-94a7-73ac2b03bfce","255ac21d-c17e-4926-9dad-13db7698ed72","2679a7a3-abde-4979-ac6e-5cf24113e0db","26b11917-4e55-41d5-aeb1-64e8b44bedba","29a173b3-4587-4257-9c93-2f0c483079c5","2b442757-da6a-46e5-ae37-b083e00062d3","336a89c4-d98a-4242-8803-4d479689bc4d","4299b01d-c5ab-4283-ae2d-31aa1fdbbfec","4469e268-1b01-49b7-a436-ea4a88ba6269","45fdd40d-5bc4-4fe7-9eb9-883c55f14a70","471bc3da-bbd4-417c-875a-595a713be7fd","4d6ab7d0-4e16-4d1b-aa49-7f453c9352b6","4eb18b90-e310-48db-9531-68b146420749","5118358f-2777-4bfd-a761-adb4bc1da763","51a534c1-9193-4b8c-bbd2-b4e368930ead","5245dc0a-5d68-4a00-ad89-6255f3bee930","534ab39c-32c3-46ea-a742-5095170a0003","5374dadc-cd7f-41df-b8d9-8ef7c10ec693","54637d34-f16e-4e98-84c1-681a0fca559c","54686005-b842-4cc5-82b1-0276e36a42b6","590fff58-7ba9-4a5b-8232-4c27d67f13b1","5f6c5fd0-a2f8-4bfe-9ac4-a8d06bc8640a","6cf864fb-5956-4416-a1c5-f42153e66ec4","71196507-ad87-406f-a4df-edc8a14b1575","747400a0-bfad-4fa2-8004-06f237d1c543","7a539249-77a2-4e2b-a29f-6952304d80d7","7a707681-5edc-461c-b5a8-0057a374f3cc","7b3b345d-0902-4461-a6bc-747c26feb7f2","7c914cb3-8ba1-4768-ac56-a051b75a6e8b","81f9e1b1-71fd-45a2-9292-017420336059","84ea460e-bfc2-4977-aebb-32594a90693b","867c2a12-155a-4309-aff0-300c6125824c","93c87fee-61ec-4ea8-bd4f-3434669835ee","946d9238-09b9-474e-8481-5e734cedca7a","948eda84-20a8-442d-8a0a-ffba051904a4","94faca18-b471-4748-8bab-f399641cedbd","a06cd968-9dc5-42c5-a6e8-3d3c36dfc8c2","a18ba308-f8ab-4590-b466-daf80aa2b59c","a3ce7cd2-ee71-42ce-b4f7-96a81c6bd295","ab7d0ab2-d774-415c-bd3f-a606f92ef3c3","ac5e071a-48a2-4a53-a1f6-5fc7b6d35280","b6a4c3c9-311e-4a4f-beaf-d0012bbfbf51","c4b35547-a0d3-4cad-b391-177ba64d7c63","c66f7c07-f922-4abd-8805-71a0fade560f","cd235f2c-1119-4002-b756-61e2983b0232","d5ff3294-0ecd-48eb-b9dd-a2c0282a055a","d8ab6193-0742-4b7e-99ea-f1131b5fc36f","dc9b6179-78d1-4eec-9df7-47aadc6c4002","e2f38cc3-06ff-4db2-8aad-a537c1e1d0c8","eac2c9bd-6ddc-48dc-92e0-405c318acfb0","ec990258-7999-4c93-81af-59b6ab2c65df","ef391115-fde1-44aa-ab00-abb8e2e7ec82","f58af8d2-a271-4586-b2b4-1b399c9f84de","fa1e38b4-4ced-4f4b-9a7b-b1b89ff13da7","fec4e8d2-6a2f-4046-b9d4-85a831f76655","oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-bd1df718191f8f6e","oil-c72d68cafd2478be","oil-c94e003c369b3450","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-fba2e5ff157abb74","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:foundIn"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:location-and-supply-chain:fflo-commonin","name":"fflo:commonIn","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":50,"article_count":26,"event_count":26,"article_ids":["1c7ea343-020a-4266-9854-b12ebfa2cf50","2679a7a3-abde-4979-ac6e-5cf24113e0db","26b11917-4e55-41d5-aeb1-64e8b44bedba","2c075e82-3fe3-4b95-a68a-f0fad41e51f5","368930a7-2085-43bd-bb79-62d471c9e75c","3d6b98eb-c79e-460c-883b-9c997ffea009","43e20f96-27cb-4f67-b7e5-6228aea8e7b6","4a638904-2bcf-4037-8afd-ec6e5b0b6b11","502ff9a1-ac00-4ef2-96cb-0a0614085766","5a7bde0b-59e0-4f86-9b63-2bbebb593d41","5fa4530c-d60b-48c1-b6b2-371abff6d77a","9368fe71-a18d-4580-8063-8e3f17e6cec9","b5940660-7f58-4123-bb25-6f78d4e1694d","d96f8ae8-4753-4f7b-9ec5-3238eca05841","d9794536-257f-4a12-8d46-a7c0c649fb97","f1307eae-cbfb-4f04-b6cc-3facd9e296d6","oil-08837290b8f04c6c","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-846611108e27fafb","oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","oil-9790eee6e00c0018","oil-d276b566dce62194","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:commonIn"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:location-and-supply-chain:fflo-collectedat","name":"fflo:collectedAt","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":31,"article_count":22,"event_count":22,"article_ids":["23ff1efe-782a-4174-8f33-41a3ff0e8c44","301bb818-ff44-4346-9ffe-ad58bf13cfb2","7ddc7283-670a-4dfb-9e38-a11aa0c579c2","b4a8aa1a-7262-4318-9579-9fff20f959a6","c349f006-e1f4-498e-970a-626a724e2231","cfa001c3-f0fc-45cd-8a71-3e35d2026e1f","db8eb9e3-f6e6-4be4-b6d2-d135a6c3e9ac","e4aba04c-81ff-438c-a506-881ff2436c82","e6d36e44-00e2-4f9e-95b1-e892e44117eb","oil-1c3f4e35a1252449","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-438415c185832786","oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","oil-7ed3f9582cae741d","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","oil-fc714f38909e4348"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:collectedAt"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:location-and-supply-chain:fflo-producedby","name":"fflo:producedBy","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":26,"article_count":22,"event_count":22,"article_ids":["102a4953-33a2-4842-827e-987e3bb6ce7a","43de8661-2844-46b7-bb39-15eb17f6b82e","471bc3da-bbd4-417c-875a-595a713be7fd","4cd73621-691c-4866-91c1-0b99d0d1a89a","4eb18b90-e310-48db-9531-68b146420749","5118358f-2777-4bfd-a761-adb4bc1da763","550bda80-b5be-488a-89f6-64b9698b4033","66bb816a-1961-4e45-8460-9328304c7956","7a539249-77a2-4e2b-a29f-6952304d80d7","7a707681-5edc-461c-b5a8-0057a374f3cc","a06cd968-9dc5-42c5-a6e8-3d3c36dfc8c2","adad636e-6844-49cb-bb07-54ff4f1a044f","c6e1c64f-1094-4a24-9d3e-8103fb4d94ab","caae3943-065a-475a-a6fe-f5706ce3db97","d3c6617c-2925-40b2-aa72-9b0b6c5e83d4","d8ab6193-0742-4b7e-99ea-f1131b5fc36f","dc9b6179-78d1-4eec-9df7-47aadc6c4002","oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-7269f661e72c703f","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","oil-c72d68cafd2478be"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:producedBy"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:location-and-supply-chain:fflo-occursat","name":"fflo:occursAt","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":11,"article_count":10,"event_count":10,"article_ids":["255ac21d-c17e-4926-9dad-13db7698ed72","28a03096-e60c-4adb-b4fa-55f0bd28a95d","2c075e82-3fe3-4b95-a68a-f0fad41e51f5","3c0e9d23-f858-47eb-8e7a-23db1d42822a","4a638904-2bcf-4037-8afd-ec6e5b0b6b11","502ff9a1-ac00-4ef2-96cb-0a0614085766","590fff58-7ba9-4a5b-8232-4c27d67f13b1","8187d86e-f46c-4e26-8188-a4e7b31de2f6","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-fc5474312cf8529f"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:occursAt"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:location-and-supply-chain:fflo-outputof","name":"fflo:outputOf","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":5,"article_count":4,"event_count":4,"article_ids":["67c4a0dd-5f32-4dde-b733-4a4a9e5dfafb","892c7a97-bb6b-47a5-9402-8a5293acf25b","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-e1aa62675070cacd"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:outputOf"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:location-and-supply-chain:fso-haslocation","name":"fso:hasLocation","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fso:hasLocation"]}]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:group:regulation-and-enforcement","name":"Regulation and enforcement","definition":"Relationships describing authorities, targets, actions, standards, and penalties.","occurrences":521,"article_count":257,"event_count":257,"article_ids":["04c00967-a247-4802-b3c2-3f266885c385","05937ca4-de64-422f-ba56-878f6152027c","0a23e582-3dac-4091-bf36-a08d511a3763","0a342064-5378-4aff-b4aa-34ae5c1ab66b","0aa842b8-1ac9-4243-a8b6-5d98d32d6089","0b5a50e0-df3b-42ea-83c6-80bc16cf39fb","0d96e6b1-57f6-4555-8711-703a6c818eea","0e518ac8-dc53-4c79-938a-bd26c1142eeb","0f7493be-b335-4851-9029-9e87ba0da155","102a4953-33a2-4842-827e-987e3bb6ce7a","10f36230-190b-4b13-8cfc-8d12c2f37080","1931e9b4-edf1-42ec-a9c4-00ff0cbcff9a","1addfba0-b7e9-4722-85be-a642cdf63571","1c7ea343-020a-4266-9854-b12ebfa2cf50","1c8fe57c-2cee-4f73-a5f3-6ee4051024e7","1de65c17-36dd-4ba6-ada6-bcd98b556aad","1e6b9f5b-a065-4242-ae58-1f105455955f","2010c6e2-c9cb-4a3e-b22b-8cabf1044074","21fb2b00-9b86-4924-9a0d-248f976cfd93","22261df7-8974-447f-a1cf-192c59528f64","229a7f40-f956-476e-8c84-3fd9ed3d6c29","22bf4101-c33b-4711-b6e3-379968f7c217","23ff1efe-782a-4174-8f33-41a3ff0e8c44","26ac5726-fd69-42b8-a80e-6a71b91ba466","2b442757-da6a-46e5-ae37-b083e00062d3","2d8a95d1-8554-4194-b427-4239c3f9ad5b","2f23ec7d-e712-46f5-ae1c-5e7634725242","2fc5c9f1-64d2-498f-8f7a-96d94b926f6d","301bb818-ff44-4346-9ffe-ad58bf13cfb2","31cae76c-aa62-4328-bd40-368275f60e9f","31f1f824-c698-4b97-a52a-1a1136a9ac6e","3278338f-1fa0-4045-9701-e237d5ad0930","3282adec-c328-4317-a091-a126587d78de","33326887-4ed0-4562-a0ac-b889d6ad53a9","3401730f-3850-4c7d-884f-dcdb1d086c42","34b8b88f-e283-46cd-ba6e-f373dc3d4395","3624ed70-d464-4caa-9b4e-4dfc2ed435dc","36a70fc6-de5a-494c-9dc5-801fe7a7a53d","3797cfc4-05a5-422b-b823-ed3bb850f540","3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","3d6b98eb-c79e-460c-883b-9c997ffea009","3f674523-5416-4b89-8cab-fe3ddf3c9e7e","438c4f31-19bd-4ff3-bed4-035569ec6cbf","43de8661-2844-46b7-bb39-15eb17f6b82e","4469e268-1b01-49b7-a436-ea4a88ba6269","451d9824-7933-403d-beaa-1ac6398509c9","45fdd40d-5bc4-4fe7-9eb9-883c55f14a70","46441742-607f-484f-80fe-b1334048144a","471bc3da-bbd4-417c-875a-595a713be7fd","4726ed7e-d61a-4a2c-9e05-59cbaa4f1bf0","473ed916-1979-4222-b1e8-38d39c51fe03","47635cd8-696c-4adf-94ed-338f084a3d62","484a6113-0a95-4624-8291-c00710260e4d","4974f73f-37bc-4300-8d31-d97ca337365b","4a021f95-539e-4217-98a0-d651be9a3b47","4d6ab7d0-4e16-4d1b-aa49-7f453c9352b6","4eb18b90-e310-48db-9531-68b146420749","4f3026f8-7217-4bf9-af6e-71bcad8bb1c5","502ff9a1-ac00-4ef2-96cb-0a0614085766","504dd102-6089-4fcb-a066-0006720862a7","5118358f-2777-4bfd-a761-adb4bc1da763","51a534c1-9193-4b8c-bbd2-b4e368930ead","5245dc0a-5d68-4a00-ad89-6255f3bee930","526515f5-4a82-4b0b-9e1c-7f3a2aa4cde4","52bd3a8a-1c92-484d-8be6-5f7e4a7274e1","53f8ec9a-900f-481f-bfb5-a6ca452416ed","550bda80-b5be-488a-89f6-64b9698b4033","554708da-6872-4a1b-91cc-3beeb59fbf2e","55552c00-e696-4ac2-951e-156364cb1337","57b2326c-e877-4995-82fc-221eda139718","5804b97c-c416-49d1-9fbd-5bb52c0595dd","58163259-bc87-4025-a6cc-f3a0848b52cf","58679f65-396b-4b1f-b725-9907ebc9f038","590fff58-7ba9-4a5b-8232-4c27d67f13b1","6411a3a1-2932-41eb-b497-f9a2400de74c","66bb816a-1961-4e45-8460-9328304c7956","6721b632-2b4f-492a-840d-bb05d2a9f1af","67c4a0dd-5f32-4dde-b733-4a4a9e5dfafb","6ab671c9-310c-4d88-bd88-0251180b2345","6cf864fb-5956-4416-a1c5-f42153e66ec4","6ee56cf3-78f2-4420-bede-08f76397b2fb","6f00035b-1437-428d-895c-a234866e29e0","71196507-ad87-406f-a4df-edc8a14b1575","73066633-67a8-4240-8c5a-3c4ae29b486d","747400a0-bfad-4fa2-8004-06f237d1c543","75f7eb04-35fe-48ce-af4a-d0ccf3067076","79cfeedd-0cef-4026-962d-c86d241c4e56","7a707681-5edc-461c-b5a8-0057a374f3cc","7c914cb3-8ba1-4768-ac56-a051b75a6e8b","7ddc7283-670a-4dfb-9e38-a11aa0c579c2","8151434e-f600-47a9-93df-16b483e88961","816a43e1-6b33-4a27-a385-9d12dd8e924f","84a895b3-81ad-42e9-b54d-614c66aca856","892c7a97-bb6b-47a5-9402-8a5293acf25b","897c7de9-ed19-4ee2-a2d5-85b75355519d","8aaa4093-987c-4a1d-8fbd-8e1d1e495fe3","8b1ef2e6-f7a2-4db0-9589-42159cf06574","8d8b9ba9-5da4-4861-89db-348400c8ef68","8e4f2f4a-8039-4ba0-9b6d-beecad106136","905b10d3-5531-40bc-b5e3-84beb79f1af2","92b301e8-97fb-47a7-94a6-b858beb0a1fb","9368fe71-a18d-4580-8063-8e3f17e6cec9","93c87fee-61ec-4ea8-bd4f-3434669835ee","946d9238-09b9-474e-8481-5e734cedca7a","94d114b9-3c47-468e-8714-ed449f90e8e4","94faca18-b471-4748-8bab-f399641cedbd","95044e07-ad37-43f6-95b0-cebe1e9f8ce0","96adc5c1-5a68-473e-9d38-85bed792c8fc","9c74f902-2ef0-4269-b436-acc19aa11ea5","9cbf8104-4fa2-4365-bc32-09eb2d1c9381","9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","9f454843-a34c-4619-a576-493f835993b4","a06cd968-9dc5-42c5-a6e8-3d3c36dfc8c2","a7002128-c4bc-48cd-bed1-46a529e69132","a96905fe-9d68-4a0c-9c4e-ce250411fcd9","aa57f0d8-8cb4-4c4c-8ef4-4c4acdef25e4","add15855-56e0-4264-819c-b8e8110846aa","aed9cf49-b6d3-4952-8acb-37e1eae1c31a","b3b632d3-bab8-43e4-9749-51b79e59f7dd","b4a8aa1a-7262-4318-9579-9fff20f959a6","b55fc156-b5e6-49b6-b4f1-e092d3b4f553","b5940660-7f58-4123-bb25-6f78d4e1694d","b6a4c3c9-311e-4a4f-beaf-d0012bbfbf51","b77861f3-9e86-4450-a13f-4522abb6a8ef","b78601e1-6600-408f-bc8c-52407a676ecb","bcd80071-6449-4036-accf-62939d2bc771","bdc8358e-29a2-4efa-a99e-6023a27df35b","c2853c18-cc20-43b6-bd36-3b77725ba1d7","c349f006-e1f4-498e-970a-626a724e2231","c4b35547-a0d3-4cad-b391-177ba64d7c63","c5597192-fe4a-479a-8bf7-cdcf15d74d10","c6dcef79-69bf-47eb-a0b5-7b4d6bef00fc","c8ddee14-df38-49aa-9d85-a7c6b34273a6","caae3943-065a-475a-a6fe-f5706ce3db97","cd235f2c-1119-4002-b756-61e2983b0232","cf1f664f-fab8-46ef-9768-c3fc897d3913","d301dc8a-7194-46ad-bf04-43efdc78c053","d3c6617c-2925-40b2-aa72-9b0b6c5e83d4","d7f7d93d-fda2-48cd-89a3-7b5c35ec6480","d8ab6193-0742-4b7e-99ea-f1131b5fc36f","db8eb9e3-f6e6-4be4-b6d2-d135a6c3e9ac","dc9b6179-78d1-4eec-9df7-47aadc6c4002","df6dd614-6785-4c3a-b6c7-1e091a751c64","e2f38cc3-06ff-4db2-8aad-a537c1e1d0c8","e446ef0a-2a74-42bf-bcd6-2b793506650e","e6e7e00b-0ede-4741-8419-066a93e431cd","e6f33250-4650-42ce-96e8-87ce7eebc853","e7a8eb39-66a7-4777-a0d6-cfb00f8f0798","ea51c75b-4b85-48fb-bbb7-8fde23c110aa","ea6c8861-7a39-4e19-8e71-58720131fa8d","eac2c9bd-6ddc-48dc-92e0-405c318acfb0","eb84cbb3-24d1-4565-9ec1-8bd3b9d4bec9","ec990258-7999-4c93-81af-59b6ab2c65df","ed2c35d4-102a-4b73-8382-2ac35610faed","edf6b48c-90dc-4757-814e-999556997808","eec20343-5ffa-486c-b431-59ca5e4568d4","ef391115-fde1-44aa-ab00-abb8e2e7ec82","f121b53e-c2bd-4ce5-878c-fd5a64863273","f25f2d19-18b4-4e7e-ad7b-8f30a193b3d6","f267ac1f-eff8-417a-8920-f8d37e384f79","f319102d-533a-41ff-9f08-6bda6778bb7e","f5653eaf-7d13-4c91-93c7-e30daca2ec3a","f5c77efa-f72b-424c-a810-81cd552ba3de","f75dd4aa-d0bc-4078-857d-76a41f9df08f","f9720bd0-18fb-4774-96e6-eca25490f73e","fa1e38b4-4ced-4f4b-9a7b-b1b89ff13da7","fa93085f-260f-4f91-af1c-c85c03ca06fa","faaca14c-514a-4f25-897a-cd9bbc31d5d0","fc91133d-e4b6-4458-8d6c-cb1af7bcd97e","fec4e8d2-6a2f-4046-b9d4-85a831f76655","ff4c3069-118e-4f08-aa39-6394130a8ec4","oil-06d5928124689ba0","oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-081117bbf714a215","oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0","oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-1852e8a212bd5903","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-23d97461886d2622","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-42c4efcdce45e35d","oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-438415c185832786","oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-4b88eb2520f8cc22","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-63f43befc46e25fa","oil-66b89ef48f4536a9","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-7ced813eb9eb1314","oil-7ed3f9582cae741d","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-9c21da748413e6f9","oil-9f582ea75e0eddfb","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-a882a3e8b7aeb487","oil-a9685f88d15906f6","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-b434a85e1e9196d0","oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-bd1df718191f8f6e","oil-c0e8fd0149fa83c4","oil-c1a2f95596a3b00d","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-c4d815318f8299b0","oil-c72d68cafd2478be","oil-c94e003c369b3450","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","oil-d479413f1e610f85","oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba","oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","oil-e1cd585e16b9635b","oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","oil-e72f16ac2686175c","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","oil-fba2e5ff157abb74","oil-fc5474312cf8529f","oil-fc714f38909e4348","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"entries":[{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:regulation-and-enforcement:fflo-issuedby","name":"fflo:issuedBy","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":186,"article_count":131,"event_count":131,"article_ids":["04c00967-a247-4802-b3c2-3f266885c385","0d96e6b1-57f6-4555-8711-703a6c818eea","1931e9b4-edf1-42ec-a9c4-00ff0cbcff9a","1addfba0-b7e9-4722-85be-a642cdf63571","1e6b9f5b-a065-4242-ae58-1f105455955f","2010c6e2-c9cb-4a3e-b22b-8cabf1044074","21fb2b00-9b86-4924-9a0d-248f976cfd93","229a7f40-f956-476e-8c84-3fd9ed3d6c29","22bf4101-c33b-4711-b6e3-379968f7c217","23ff1efe-782a-4174-8f33-41a3ff0e8c44","2f23ec7d-e712-46f5-ae1c-5e7634725242","2fc5c9f1-64d2-498f-8f7a-96d94b926f6d","3624ed70-d464-4caa-9b4e-4dfc2ed435dc","36a70fc6-de5a-494c-9dc5-801fe7a7a53d","3f674523-5416-4b89-8cab-fe3ddf3c9e7e","4469e268-1b01-49b7-a436-ea4a88ba6269","45fdd40d-5bc4-4fe7-9eb9-883c55f14a70","46441742-607f-484f-80fe-b1334048144a","471bc3da-bbd4-417c-875a-595a713be7fd","473ed916-1979-4222-b1e8-38d39c51fe03","4eb18b90-e310-48db-9531-68b146420749","502ff9a1-ac00-4ef2-96cb-0a0614085766","5245dc0a-5d68-4a00-ad89-6255f3bee930","526515f5-4a82-4b0b-9e1c-7f3a2aa4cde4","52bd3a8a-1c92-484d-8be6-5f7e4a7274e1","53f8ec9a-900f-481f-bfb5-a6ca452416ed","550bda80-b5be-488a-89f6-64b9698b4033","55552c00-e696-4ac2-951e-156364cb1337","57b2326c-e877-4995-82fc-221eda139718","58163259-bc87-4025-a6cc-f3a0848b52cf","58679f65-396b-4b1f-b725-9907ebc9f038","66bb816a-1961-4e45-8460-9328304c7956","67c4a0dd-5f32-4dde-b733-4a4a9e5dfafb","747400a0-bfad-4fa2-8004-06f237d1c543","75f7eb04-35fe-48ce-af4a-d0ccf3067076","79cfeedd-0cef-4026-962d-c86d241c4e56","7c914cb3-8ba1-4768-ac56-a051b75a6e8b","7ddc7283-670a-4dfb-9e38-a11aa0c579c2","8151434e-f600-47a9-93df-16b483e88961","816a43e1-6b33-4a27-a385-9d12dd8e924f","892c7a97-bb6b-47a5-9402-8a5293acf25b","897c7de9-ed19-4ee2-a2d5-85b75355519d","8aaa4093-987c-4a1d-8fbd-8e1d1e495fe3","8b1ef2e6-f7a2-4db0-9589-42159cf06574","8d8b9ba9-5da4-4861-89db-348400c8ef68","905b10d3-5531-40bc-b5e3-84beb79f1af2","92b301e8-97fb-47a7-94a6-b858beb0a1fb","9368fe71-a18d-4580-8063-8e3f17e6cec9","93c87fee-61ec-4ea8-bd4f-3434669835ee","94d114b9-3c47-468e-8714-ed449f90e8e4","96adc5c1-5a68-473e-9d38-85bed792c8fc","9c74f902-2ef0-4269-b436-acc19aa11ea5","a7002128-c4bc-48cd-bed1-46a529e69132","aa57f0d8-8cb4-4c4c-8ef4-4c4acdef25e4","add15855-56e0-4264-819c-b8e8110846aa","b3b632d3-bab8-43e4-9749-51b79e59f7dd","b4a8aa1a-7262-4318-9579-9fff20f959a6","b55fc156-b5e6-49b6-b4f1-e092d3b4f553","b5940660-7f58-4123-bb25-6f78d4e1694d","b77861f3-9e86-4450-a13f-4522abb6a8ef","b78601e1-6600-408f-bc8c-52407a676ecb","c349f006-e1f4-498e-970a-626a724e2231","c4b35547-a0d3-4cad-b391-177ba64d7c63","c5597192-fe4a-479a-8bf7-cdcf15d74d10","c6dcef79-69bf-47eb-a0b5-7b4d6bef00fc","c8ddee14-df38-49aa-9d85-a7c6b34273a6","caae3943-065a-475a-a6fe-f5706ce3db97","cd235f2c-1119-4002-b756-61e2983b0232","d301dc8a-7194-46ad-bf04-43efdc78c053","e6e7e00b-0ede-4741-8419-066a93e431cd","ea51c75b-4b85-48fb-bbb7-8fde23c110aa","ed2c35d4-102a-4b73-8382-2ac35610faed","ef391115-fde1-44aa-ab00-abb8e2e7ec82","f267ac1f-eff8-417a-8920-f8d37e384f79","f319102d-533a-41ff-9f08-6bda6778bb7e","f75dd4aa-d0bc-4078-857d-76a41f9df08f","fa1e38b4-4ced-4f4b-9a7b-b1b89ff13da7","fc91133d-e4b6-4458-8d6c-cb1af7bcd97e","oil-06d5928124689ba0","oil-077084a32a4e8faa","oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0","oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-42c4efcdce45e35d","oil-438415c185832786","oil-4877f76e174824e5","oil-4b88eb2520f8cc22","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-63f43befc46e25fa","oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-7ced813eb9eb1314","oil-7ed3f9582cae741d","oil-829d382c68663635","oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","oil-9f582ea75e0eddfb","oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-b434a85e1e9196d0","oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-bd1df718191f8f6e","oil-c0e8fd0149fa83c4","oil-c1a2f95596a3b00d","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-c4d815318f8299b0","oil-c72d68cafd2478be","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","oil-d479413f1e610f85","oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","oil-e1cd585e16b9635b","oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","oil-e72f16ac2686175c","oil-f9ab44d774810d93","oil-fba2e5ff157abb74","oil-fc5474312cf8529f","oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:issuedBy"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:regulation-and-enforcement:fflo-targets","name":"fflo:targets","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":110,"article_count":69,"event_count":69,"article_ids":["04c00967-a247-4802-b3c2-3f266885c385","05937ca4-de64-422f-ba56-878f6152027c","0a342064-5378-4aff-b4aa-34ae5c1ab66b","0aa842b8-1ac9-4243-a8b6-5d98d32d6089","10f36230-190b-4b13-8cfc-8d12c2f37080","23ff1efe-782a-4174-8f33-41a3ff0e8c44","2f23ec7d-e712-46f5-ae1c-5e7634725242","3624ed70-d464-4caa-9b4e-4dfc2ed435dc","4469e268-1b01-49b7-a436-ea4a88ba6269","5245dc0a-5d68-4a00-ad89-6255f3bee930","554708da-6872-4a1b-91cc-3beeb59fbf2e","55552c00-e696-4ac2-951e-156364cb1337","58163259-bc87-4025-a6cc-f3a0848b52cf","66bb816a-1961-4e45-8460-9328304c7956","6721b632-2b4f-492a-840d-bb05d2a9f1af","6ab671c9-310c-4d88-bd88-0251180b2345","75f7eb04-35fe-48ce-af4a-d0ccf3067076","7c914cb3-8ba1-4768-ac56-a051b75a6e8b","8151434e-f600-47a9-93df-16b483e88961","84a895b3-81ad-42e9-b54d-614c66aca856","92b301e8-97fb-47a7-94a6-b858beb0a1fb","95044e07-ad37-43f6-95b0-cebe1e9f8ce0","a06cd968-9dc5-42c5-a6e8-3d3c36dfc8c2","aed9cf49-b6d3-4952-8acb-37e1eae1c31a","b3b632d3-bab8-43e4-9749-51b79e59f7dd","b78601e1-6600-408f-bc8c-52407a676ecb","c4b35547-a0d3-4cad-b391-177ba64d7c63","e7a8eb39-66a7-4777-a0d6-cfb00f8f0798","ea6c8861-7a39-4e19-8e71-58720131fa8d","f5653eaf-7d13-4c91-93c7-e30daca2ec3a","f9720bd0-18fb-4774-96e6-eca25490f73e","fa1e38b4-4ced-4f4b-9a7b-b1b89ff13da7","fa93085f-260f-4f91-af1c-c85c03ca06fa","faaca14c-514a-4f25-897a-cd9bbc31d5d0","fec4e8d2-6a2f-4046-b9d4-85a831f76655","oil-081117bbf714a215","oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-23d97461886d2622","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-438415c185832786","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-63f43befc46e25fa","oil-76b9943656157edc","oil-7ced813eb9eb1314","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-a882a3e8b7aeb487","oil-a9685f88d15906f6","oil-aa814b41a4920904","oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-bd1df718191f8f6e","oil-c0e8fd0149fa83c4","oil-c1a2f95596a3b00d","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-c4d815318f8299b0","oil-c72d68cafd2478be","oil-d479413f1e610f85","oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","oil-e1cd585e16b9635b","oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:targets"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:regulation-and-enforcement:fso-isperformedat","name":"fso:isPerformedAt","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":69,"article_count":58,"event_count":58,"article_ids":["0a23e582-3dac-4091-bf36-a08d511a3763","0e518ac8-dc53-4c79-938a-bd26c1142eeb","1c7ea343-020a-4266-9854-b12ebfa2cf50","1c8fe57c-2cee-4f73-a5f3-6ee4051024e7","1e6b9f5b-a065-4242-ae58-1f105455955f","26ac5726-fd69-42b8-a80e-6a71b91ba466","2b442757-da6a-46e5-ae37-b083e00062d3","2d8a95d1-8554-4194-b427-4239c3f9ad5b","301bb818-ff44-4346-9ffe-ad58bf13cfb2","31cae76c-aa62-4328-bd40-368275f60e9f","3278338f-1fa0-4045-9701-e237d5ad0930","33326887-4ed0-4562-a0ac-b889d6ad53a9","3797cfc4-05a5-422b-b823-ed3bb850f540","451d9824-7933-403d-beaa-1ac6398509c9","471bc3da-bbd4-417c-875a-595a713be7fd","4726ed7e-d61a-4a2c-9e05-59cbaa4f1bf0","47635cd8-696c-4adf-94ed-338f084a3d62","4eb18b90-e310-48db-9531-68b146420749","51a534c1-9193-4b8c-bbd2-b4e368930ead","5245dc0a-5d68-4a00-ad89-6255f3bee930","66bb816a-1961-4e45-8460-9328304c7956","6721b632-2b4f-492a-840d-bb05d2a9f1af","6cf864fb-5956-4416-a1c5-f42153e66ec4","6ee56cf3-78f2-4420-bede-08f76397b2fb","71196507-ad87-406f-a4df-edc8a14b1575","73066633-67a8-4240-8c5a-3c4ae29b486d","747400a0-bfad-4fa2-8004-06f237d1c543","7a707681-5edc-461c-b5a8-0057a374f3cc","95044e07-ad37-43f6-95b0-cebe1e9f8ce0","aed9cf49-b6d3-4952-8acb-37e1eae1c31a","b6a4c3c9-311e-4a4f-beaf-d0012bbfbf51","bdc8358e-29a2-4efa-a99e-6023a27df35b","cd235f2c-1119-4002-b756-61e2983b0232","cf1f664f-fab8-46ef-9768-c3fc897d3913","e2f38cc3-06ff-4db2-8aad-a537c1e1d0c8","e446ef0a-2a74-42bf-bcd6-2b793506650e","eb84cbb3-24d1-4565-9ec1-8bd3b9d4bec9","edf6b48c-90dc-4757-814e-999556997808","eec20343-5ffa-486c-b431-59ca5e4568d4","f121b53e-c2bd-4ce5-878c-fd5a64863273","f25f2d19-18b4-4e7e-ad7b-8f30a193b3d6","f319102d-533a-41ff-9f08-6bda6778bb7e","ff4c3069-118e-4f08-aa39-6394130a8ec4","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-85127f0bde3109d3","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-c0e8fd0149fa83c4","oil-c3728ff063420cf8","oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","oil-d6d2041d0727d059","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-d7ec006e22e070de","oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fso:isPerformedAt"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:regulation-and-enforcement:fflo-triggeredaction","name":"fflo:triggeredAction","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":63,"article_count":52,"event_count":52,"article_ids":["04c00967-a247-4802-b3c2-3f266885c385","0a23e582-3dac-4091-bf36-a08d511a3763","0f7493be-b335-4851-9029-9e87ba0da155","102a4953-33a2-4842-827e-987e3bb6ce7a","1de65c17-36dd-4ba6-ada6-bcd98b556aad","22261df7-8974-447f-a1cf-192c59528f64","2b442757-da6a-46e5-ae37-b083e00062d3","3624ed70-d464-4caa-9b4e-4dfc2ed435dc","3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","43de8661-2844-46b7-bb39-15eb17f6b82e","471bc3da-bbd4-417c-875a-595a713be7fd","484a6113-0a95-4624-8291-c00710260e4d","4974f73f-37bc-4300-8d31-d97ca337365b","4a021f95-539e-4217-98a0-d651be9a3b47","4d6ab7d0-4e16-4d1b-aa49-7f453c9352b6","5804b97c-c416-49d1-9fbd-5bb52c0595dd","590fff58-7ba9-4a5b-8232-4c27d67f13b1","6411a3a1-2932-41eb-b497-f9a2400de74c","6ee56cf3-78f2-4420-bede-08f76397b2fb","75f7eb04-35fe-48ce-af4a-d0ccf3067076","79cfeedd-0cef-4026-962d-c86d241c4e56","7a707681-5edc-461c-b5a8-0057a374f3cc","94faca18-b471-4748-8bab-f399641cedbd","9cbf8104-4fa2-4365-bc32-09eb2d1c9381","9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","9f454843-a34c-4619-a576-493f835993b4","a96905fe-9d68-4a0c-9c4e-ce250411fcd9","b6a4c3c9-311e-4a4f-beaf-d0012bbfbf51","bcd80071-6449-4036-accf-62939d2bc771","c4b35547-a0d3-4cad-b391-177ba64d7c63","caae3943-065a-475a-a6fe-f5706ce3db97","cd235f2c-1119-4002-b756-61e2983b0232","d3c6617c-2925-40b2-aa72-9b0b6c5e83d4","df6dd614-6785-4c3a-b6c7-1e091a751c64","e6f33250-4650-42ce-96e8-87ce7eebc853","ec990258-7999-4c93-81af-59b6ab2c65df","f319102d-533a-41ff-9f08-6bda6778bb7e","f5c77efa-f72b-424c-a810-81cd552ba3de","fa1e38b4-4ced-4f4b-9a7b-b1b89ff13da7","ff4c3069-118e-4f08-aa39-6394130a8ec4","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","oil-6e721139517af252","oil-70649ae86f99dffc","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-898a1362002b727d","oil-bd1df718191f8f6e","oil-c94e003c369b3450","oil-d02d8c31bf513f40"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:triggeredAction"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:regulation-and-enforcement:fso-isperformedon","name":"fso:isPerformedOn","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":43,"article_count":40,"event_count":40,"article_ids":["05937ca4-de64-422f-ba56-878f6152027c","0a23e582-3dac-4091-bf36-a08d511a3763","0b5a50e0-df3b-42ea-83c6-80bc16cf39fb","1931e9b4-edf1-42ec-a9c4-00ff0cbcff9a","1c7ea343-020a-4266-9854-b12ebfa2cf50","2d8a95d1-8554-4194-b427-4239c3f9ad5b","31f1f824-c698-4b97-a52a-1a1136a9ac6e","33326887-4ed0-4562-a0ac-b889d6ad53a9","438c4f31-19bd-4ff3-bed4-035569ec6cbf","46441742-607f-484f-80fe-b1334048144a","47635cd8-696c-4adf-94ed-338f084a3d62","4f3026f8-7217-4bf9-af6e-71bcad8bb1c5","504dd102-6089-4fcb-a066-0006720862a7","6721b632-2b4f-492a-840d-bb05d2a9f1af","6cf864fb-5956-4416-a1c5-f42153e66ec4","6f00035b-1437-428d-895c-a234866e29e0","816a43e1-6b33-4a27-a385-9d12dd8e924f","92b301e8-97fb-47a7-94a6-b858beb0a1fb","9cbf8104-4fa2-4365-bc32-09eb2d1c9381","b4a8aa1a-7262-4318-9579-9fff20f959a6","bdc8358e-29a2-4efa-a99e-6023a27df35b","d3c6617c-2925-40b2-aa72-9b0b6c5e83d4","eb84cbb3-24d1-4565-9ec1-8bd3b9d4bec9","eec20343-5ffa-486c-b431-59ca5e4568d4","f319102d-533a-41ff-9f08-6bda6778bb7e","oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","oil-1852e8a212bd5903","oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","oil-66b89ef48f4536a9","oil-a7080ed266c36f88","oil-af3a540365afc7c2","oil-c1a2f95596a3b00d","oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","oil-fc714f38909e4348"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fso:isPerformedOn"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:regulation-and-enforcement:fflo-complieswith","name":"fflo:compliesWith","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":28,"article_count":20,"event_count":20,"article_ids":["1addfba0-b7e9-4722-85be-a642cdf63571","2fc5c9f1-64d2-498f-8f7a-96d94b926f6d","3282adec-c328-4317-a091-a126587d78de","3401730f-3850-4c7d-884f-dcdb1d086c42","34b8b88f-e283-46cd-ba6e-f373dc3d4395","79cfeedd-0cef-4026-962d-c86d241c4e56","8aaa4093-987c-4a1d-8fbd-8e1d1e495fe3","8e4f2f4a-8039-4ba0-9b6d-beecad106136","946d9238-09b9-474e-8481-5e734cedca7a","a06cd968-9dc5-42c5-a6e8-3d3c36dfc8c2","aed9cf49-b6d3-4952-8acb-37e1eae1c31a","c2853c18-cc20-43b6-bd36-3b77725ba1d7","c4b35547-a0d3-4cad-b391-177ba64d7c63","d7f7d93d-fda2-48cd-89a3-7b5c35ec6480","db8eb9e3-f6e6-4be4-b6d2-d135a6c3e9ac","eac2c9bd-6ddc-48dc-92e0-405c318acfb0","edf6b48c-90dc-4757-814e-999556997808","oil-9c21da748413e6f9","oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","oil-af3a540365afc7c2"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:compliesWith"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:regulation-and-enforcement:fflo-appliestofood","name":"fflo:appliesToFood","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":14,"article_count":13,"event_count":13,"article_ids":["102a4953-33a2-4842-827e-987e3bb6ce7a","2f23ec7d-e712-46f5-ae1c-5e7634725242","3d6b98eb-c79e-460c-883b-9c997ffea009","5118358f-2777-4bfd-a761-adb4bc1da763","6721b632-2b4f-492a-840d-bb05d2a9f1af","d3c6617c-2925-40b2-aa72-9b0b6c5e83d4","dc9b6179-78d1-4eec-9df7-47aadc6c4002","oil-2027fa14e94958fd","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-63f43befc46e25fa","oil-7b8839ea47991949","oil-9c21da748413e6f9","oil-c3728ff063420cf8"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:appliesToFood"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:regulation-and-enforcement:fflo-appliesto","name":"fflo:appliesTo","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":4,"article_count":3,"event_count":3,"article_ids":["oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:appliesTo"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:regulation-and-enforcement:fflo-violates","name":"fflo:violates","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":3,"article_count":3,"event_count":3,"article_ids":["55552c00-e696-4ac2-951e-156364cb1337","d8ab6193-0742-4b7e-99ea-f1131b5fc36f","oil-c94e003c369b3450"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:violates"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:regulation-and-enforcement:fflo-triggerspenalty","name":"fflo:triggersPenalty","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-42c4efcdce45e35d"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:triggersPenalty"]}]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:group:other-or-schema-review","name":"Other or schema review","definition":"Relationships outside the main families, including explicit schema mismatches.","occurrences":88,"article_count":51,"event_count":51,"article_ids":["0932679a-fe82-4a1e-949e-9d4fd17ed2a0","0a113e2a-26d3-45e4-9064-7cfa2f39230b","0d14295d-a954-4163-8974-ecb51bd464e8","22261df7-8974-447f-a1cf-192c59528f64","2679a7a3-abde-4979-ac6e-5cf24113e0db","26ac5726-fd69-42b8-a80e-6a71b91ba466","2c075e82-3fe3-4b95-a68a-f0fad41e51f5","34b8b88f-e283-46cd-ba6e-f373dc3d4395","368930a7-2085-43bd-bb79-62d471c9e75c","3d6b98eb-c79e-460c-883b-9c997ffea009","471bc3da-bbd4-417c-875a-595a713be7fd","4d6ab7d0-4e16-4d1b-aa49-7f453c9352b6","5118358f-2777-4bfd-a761-adb4bc1da763","534ab39c-32c3-46ea-a742-5095170a0003","5374dadc-cd7f-41df-b8d9-8ef7c10ec693","590fff58-7ba9-4a5b-8232-4c27d67f13b1","706f0136-7ae5-45f2-b804-e3a8c9a14d1c","747400a0-bfad-4fa2-8004-06f237d1c543","835cbabf-d424-4f04-89cb-1d8c0b08f1ab","84a895b3-81ad-42e9-b54d-614c66aca856","8e0f3d53-2c44-474d-9787-4713b7050c28","9285d418-e4e3-40a1-b1d1-da857748bfd3","9368fe71-a18d-4580-8063-8e3f17e6cec9","a06cd968-9dc5-42c5-a6e8-3d3c36dfc8c2","a7002128-c4bc-48cd-bed1-46a529e69132","aed9cf49-b6d3-4952-8acb-37e1eae1c31a","b4b614f7-a43d-4e57-9766-25f7fef90d68","bdc8358e-29a2-4efa-a99e-6023a27df35b","c8ddee14-df38-49aa-9d85-a7c6b34273a6","c999d71f-777d-4d80-9f37-37391f97acd4","cfa001c3-f0fc-45cd-8a71-3e35d2026e1f","d156577c-5001-4f1b-90f7-d7b21a37497b","d315d00d-a3eb-4c0f-9554-c1395585910f","d7f7d93d-fda2-48cd-89a3-7b5c35ec6480","eac2c9bd-6ddc-48dc-92e0-405c318acfb0","f121b53e-c2bd-4ce5-878c-fd5a64863273","f58af8d2-a271-4586-b2b4-1b399c9f84de","fa93085f-260f-4f91-af1c-c85c03ca06fa","fec4e8d2-6a2f-4046-b9d4-85a831f76655","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-42c4efcdce45e35d","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-b96369f55af40397","oil-c94e003c369b3450","oil-d276b566dce62194","oil-daf4ca29b4849989","oil-e1cd585e16b9635b","oil-f5b6386895404f0b","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"entries":[{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:other-or-schema-review:fflo-hasdefinition","name":"fflo:hasDefinition","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":18,"article_count":12,"event_count":12,"article_ids":["0a113e2a-26d3-45e4-9064-7cfa2f39230b","3d6b98eb-c79e-460c-883b-9c997ffea009","471bc3da-bbd4-417c-875a-595a713be7fd","4d6ab7d0-4e16-4d1b-aa49-7f453c9352b6","706f0136-7ae5-45f2-b804-e3a8c9a14d1c","aed9cf49-b6d3-4952-8acb-37e1eae1c31a","c8ddee14-df38-49aa-9d85-a7c6b34273a6","d156577c-5001-4f1b-90f7-d7b21a37497b","d7f7d93d-fda2-48cd-89a3-7b5c35ec6480","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-f5b6386895404f0b"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:hasDefinition"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:other-or-schema-review:lkif-created-by","name":"lkif:created_by","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":9,"article_count":8,"event_count":8,"article_ids":["34b8b88f-e283-46cd-ba6e-f373dc3d4395","368930a7-2085-43bd-bb79-62d471c9e75c","534ab39c-32c3-46ea-a742-5095170a0003","a06cd968-9dc5-42c5-a6e8-3d3c36dfc8c2","eac2c9bd-6ddc-48dc-92e0-405c318acfb0","f121b53e-c2bd-4ce5-878c-fd5a64863273","oil-3be954e8def80c8d","oil-c94e003c369b3450"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["lkif:created_by"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:other-or-schema-review:fflo-haspermissiblelimit","name":"fflo:hasPermissibleLimit","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":13,"article_count":7,"event_count":7,"article_ids":["0a113e2a-26d3-45e4-9064-7cfa2f39230b","0d14295d-a954-4163-8974-ecb51bd464e8","5118358f-2777-4bfd-a761-adb4bc1da763","cfa001c3-f0fc-45cd-8a71-3e35d2026e1f","d156577c-5001-4f1b-90f7-d7b21a37497b","f58af8d2-a271-4586-b2b4-1b399c9f84de","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:hasPermissibleLimit"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:other-or-schema-review:fflo-inputto","name":"fflo:inputTo","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":5,"article_count":5,"event_count":5,"article_ids":["26ac5726-fd69-42b8-a80e-6a71b91ba466","2c075e82-3fe3-4b95-a68a-f0fad41e51f5","747400a0-bfad-4fa2-8004-06f237d1c543","835cbabf-d424-4f04-89cb-1d8c0b08f1ab","eac2c9bd-6ddc-48dc-92e0-405c318acfb0"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:inputTo"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:other-or-schema-review:fflo-affectspopulation","name":"fflo:affectsPopulation","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":6,"article_count":4,"event_count":4,"article_ids":["9368fe71-a18d-4580-8063-8e3f17e6cec9","b4b614f7-a43d-4e57-9766-25f7fef90d68","d315d00d-a3eb-4c0f-9554-c1395585910f","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:affectsPopulation"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:other-or-schema-review:fflo-citesfinding","name":"fflo:citesFinding","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":5,"article_count":4,"event_count":4,"article_ids":["0932679a-fe82-4a1e-949e-9d4fd17ed2a0","471bc3da-bbd4-417c-875a-595a713be7fd","590fff58-7ba9-4a5b-8232-4c27d67f13b1","fec4e8d2-6a2f-4046-b9d4-85a831f76655"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:citesFinding"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:other-or-schema-review:schema-mismatch","name":"SCHEMA_MISMATCH","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":5,"article_count":4,"event_count":4,"article_ids":["9285d418-e4e3-40a1-b1d1-da857748bfd3","9368fe71-a18d-4580-8063-8e3f17e6cec9","fa93085f-260f-4f91-af1c-c85c03ca06fa","oil-b96369f55af40397"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["SCHEMA_MISMATCH"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:other-or-schema-review:fflo-hasfunction","name":"fflo:hasFunction","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":5,"article_count":3,"event_count":3,"article_ids":["0d14295d-a954-4163-8974-ecb51bd464e8","8e0f3d53-2c44-474d-9787-4713b7050c28","f121b53e-c2bd-4ce5-878c-fd5a64863273"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:hasFunction"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:other-or-schema-review:fflo-carriedby","name":"fflo:carriedBy","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":2,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["534ab39c-32c3-46ea-a742-5095170a0003","5374dadc-cd7f-41df-b8d9-8ef7c10ec693"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:carriedBy"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:other-or-schema-review:fflo-propagatesto","name":"fflo:propagatesTo","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":3,"article_count":2,"event_count":2,"article_ids":["84a895b3-81ad-42e9-b54d-614c66aca856","c999d71f-777d-4d80-9f37-37391f97acd4"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:propagatesTo"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:other-or-schema-review:fflo-associatedwith","name":"fflo:associatedWith","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-d276b566dce62194"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:associatedWith"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:other-or-schema-review:fflo-contactnumber","name":"fflo:contactNumber","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-42c4efcdce45e35d"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:contactNumber"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:other-or-schema-review:fflo-definedin","name":"fflo:definedIn","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["9368fe71-a18d-4580-8063-8e3f17e6cec9"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:definedIn"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:other-or-schema-review:fflo-defines","name":"fflo:defines","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-e1cd585e16b9635b"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:defines"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:other-or-schema-review:fflo-forproperty","name":"fflo:forProperty","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["0a113e2a-26d3-45e4-9064-7cfa2f39230b"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:forProperty"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:other-or-schema-review:fflo-hassubcategory","name":"fflo:hasSubcategory","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":4,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["a7002128-c4bc-48cd-bed1-46a529e69132"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:hasSubcategory"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:other-or-schema-review:fflo-procuredfrom","name":"fflo:procuredFrom","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["22261df7-8974-447f-a1cf-192c59528f64"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:procuredFrom"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:other-or-schema-review:fflo-requireskit","name":"fflo:requiresKit","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["oil-daf4ca29b4849989"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:requiresKit"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:other-or-schema-review:fflo-specifiedin","name":"fflo:specifiedIn","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":2,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["cfa001c3-f0fc-45cd-8a71-3e35d2026e1f"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:specifiedIn"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:other-or-schema-review:fflo-wasattributedto","name":"fflo:wasAttributedTo","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":1,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["2679a7a3-abde-4979-ac6e-5cf24113e0db"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:wasAttributedTo"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:other-or-schema-review:fso-relatestoproperty","name":"fso:relatesToProperty","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":3,"article_count":1,"event_count":1,"article_ids":["bdc8358e-29a2-4efa-a99e-6023a27df35b"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fso:relatesToProperty"]}]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:group:health-and-effects","name":"Health and effects","definition":"Relationships describing effects, indicators, and health consequences.","occurrences":133,"article_count":41,"event_count":41,"article_ids":["0109eea0-3adc-4177-a6f7-e3bc31bf237d","194f3e22-f4b6-483b-9333-762c3a3b6b9d","3401730f-3850-4c7d-884f-dcdb1d086c42","411b1d1a-7b18-4425-90f0-da2c296625eb","5fa4530c-d60b-48c1-b6b2-371abff6d77a","67c4a0dd-5f32-4dde-b733-4a4a9e5dfafb","6901ef7b-f98a-4b3a-b622-85196fe10ffb","6a44ea24-a3bf-4ad8-96b1-5ae56cefb84c","706f0136-7ae5-45f2-b804-e3a8c9a14d1c","8d8b9ba9-5da4-4861-89db-348400c8ef68","91aa9ca8-e7d7-4036-a22f-5c8c8e7fc2ce","9368fe71-a18d-4580-8063-8e3f17e6cec9","944709d1-19c5-461e-a509-d35f5314cc8e","9849e210-d94b-448b-885e-7bdffe11cfe9","b4a8aa1a-7262-4318-9579-9fff20f959a6","b4b614f7-a43d-4e57-9766-25f7fef90d68","c6b3635d-7479-4594-9803-195c9d36f4a1","c8ddee14-df38-49aa-9d85-a7c6b34273a6","d11fa038-1162-4d93-9df5-6d5b35b8628b","d315d00d-a3eb-4c0f-9554-c1395585910f","e2a4561f-b8bf-4ca9-9990-3b885eaf5c2b","ea51c75b-4b85-48fb-bbb7-8fde23c110aa","f1ba13f7-7414-47ce-9df3-a6aa0902c1b9","ff092982-3b6e-4f4c-8194-6b8201ee1246","oil-06d5928124689ba0","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-8e1ede70f7533502","oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77","oil-a0831d014f72baf3","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-d276b566dce62194","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-f96a10806285c261","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"entries":[{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:health-and-effects:fflo-causeseffect","name":"fflo:causesEffect","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":116,"article_count":39,"event_count":39,"article_ids":["0109eea0-3adc-4177-a6f7-e3bc31bf237d","194f3e22-f4b6-483b-9333-762c3a3b6b9d","3401730f-3850-4c7d-884f-dcdb1d086c42","411b1d1a-7b18-4425-90f0-da2c296625eb","5fa4530c-d60b-48c1-b6b2-371abff6d77a","67c4a0dd-5f32-4dde-b733-4a4a9e5dfafb","6901ef7b-f98a-4b3a-b622-85196fe10ffb","6a44ea24-a3bf-4ad8-96b1-5ae56cefb84c","706f0136-7ae5-45f2-b804-e3a8c9a14d1c","8d8b9ba9-5da4-4861-89db-348400c8ef68","91aa9ca8-e7d7-4036-a22f-5c8c8e7fc2ce","9368fe71-a18d-4580-8063-8e3f17e6cec9","944709d1-19c5-461e-a509-d35f5314cc8e","9849e210-d94b-448b-885e-7bdffe11cfe9","b4a8aa1a-7262-4318-9579-9fff20f959a6","b4b614f7-a43d-4e57-9766-25f7fef90d68","c6b3635d-7479-4594-9803-195c9d36f4a1","c8ddee14-df38-49aa-9d85-a7c6b34273a6","d11fa038-1162-4d93-9df5-6d5b35b8628b","e2a4561f-b8bf-4ca9-9990-3b885eaf5c2b","ea51c75b-4b85-48fb-bbb7-8fde23c110aa","f1ba13f7-7414-47ce-9df3-a6aa0902c1b9","ff092982-3b6e-4f4c-8194-6b8201ee1246","oil-06d5928124689ba0","oil-21d4880656b0c52f","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-722884cee1da5016","oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","oil-8e1ede70f7533502","oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-d276b566dce62194","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-f96a10806285c261","oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:causesEffect"]},{"id":"ontology_predicates:entry:health-and-effects:fflo-haseffecttype","name":"fflo:hasEffectType","definition":"A normalized ontology relationships concept combining 1 extracted label.","occurrences":17,"article_count":12,"event_count":12,"article_ids":["194f3e22-f4b6-483b-9333-762c3a3b6b9d","6a44ea24-a3bf-4ad8-96b1-5ae56cefb84c","706f0136-7ae5-45f2-b804-e3a8c9a14d1c","9368fe71-a18d-4580-8063-8e3f17e6cec9","d315d00d-a3eb-4c0f-9554-c1395585910f","ff092982-3b6e-4f4c-8194-6b8201ee1246","oil-2f0a177eecae442b","oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","oil-a0831d014f72baf3","oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","oil-e1aa62675070cacd","oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9"],"ontology_types":[],"aliases":["fflo:hasEffectType"]}]}]}]},"articles":[{"article_id":"oil-e72f16ac2686175c","slug":"oil-e72f16ac2686175c","title":"Unsafe cooking oil, pungent smell found at KFC in Hyderabad","source":"siasat.com","date":"2026-06-21","url":"https://www.siasat.com/unsafe-cooking-oil-pungent-smell-found-at-kfc-in-hyderabad-3493459/","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.2169901507946016,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["cooking oil"],"issue_types":["unsafe_food","substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["improvement notice"],"locations":["Hyderabad, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Hyderabad: A food safety inspection at a Hyderabad KFC outlet in Nizampet on Saturday, June 20, uncovered several food safety violations, like unsafe cooking oil, a pungent smell in the kitchen and raw chicken stored...","search_text":"$3"},{"article_id":"58679f65-396b-4b1f-b725-9907ebc9f038","slug":"ghee-58679f65-396b-4b1f-b725-9907ebc9f038","title":"Hyderabad: Kondapur biryani outlet scores 92 pc in food safety","source":"siasat.com","date":"2026-06-20","url":"https://www.siasat.com/hyderabad-kondapur-biryani-outlet-scores-92-pc-in-food-safety-3492900/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.2305972,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["unsafe_food"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["instruction to procure labelled products"],"locations":["Hyderabad, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Hyderabad: Cyberabad Municipal Corporation’s (CMC) Food Safety team inspected Sattibabu Biryani near KIMS in Kondapur on Friday, June 19, as part of its ongoing food safety inspection drive across Cyberabad, with the...","search_text":"$4"},{"article_id":"05375704-5b45-4e0a-b388-9944c0c5fc9f","slug":"ghee-05375704-5b45-4e0a-b388-9944c0c5fc9f","title":"Food safety teams find hygiene and food safety violations at Sattibabu Biryani, 7 Sisters in Hyderabad","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2026-06-20","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Hyderabad/food-safety-teams-find-labelling-lapses-uncovered-food-at-sattibabu-biryani-in-kondapur/article71125565.ece","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.24408209,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["mislabeling","unsafe_food"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["instruction_to_correct"],"locations":["Hyderabad, Cyberabad, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"The food safety teams of the Cyberabad Municipal Corporation (CMC) conducted inspections at Sattibabu Biryani in Kondapur and 7 Sisters in Hitex on Saturday, June 20 and detected multiple hygiene and food safety...","search_text":"$5"},{"article_id":"oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","slug":"oil-fcd586ca6c0d66ae","title":"Daltonganj police seize spurious edible oil | Ranchi News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-06-18","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/ranchi/daltonganj-police-seize-spurious-edible-oil/articleshow/131829588.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8344556416851237,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["Edible Oils"],"issue_types":["counterfeit","substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["case registration","seizure"],"locations":["Daltonganj, Jharkhand, India"],"primary_state":"Jharkhand","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"Daltonganj: A network involved in selling spurious edible oil of a popular brand was busted and 138 boxes, containing 1,776 litres, seized from a godown near Bairya Chowk late Wednesday night, police said. Sources also...","search_text":"$6"},{"article_id":"4a021f95-539e-4217-98a0-d651be9a3b47","slug":"ghee-4a021f95-539e-4217-98a0-d651be9a3b47","title":"6,500 litres of adulterated ghee, raw material seized during raids in Delhi, Haryana","source":"thehansindia.com","date":"2026-06-18","url":"https://www.thehansindia.com/news/national/6500-litres-of-adulterated-ghee-raw-material-seized-during-raids-in-delhi-haryana-1087624","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit"],"adulterants":["unidentified oil"],"actions":["seizure","FIR registration"],"locations":["Dwarka, South West Delhi, Delhi, India"],"primary_state":"Delhi","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":12,"excerpt":"New Delhi: In a major crackdown on a food adulteration network, the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) seized more than 6,500 litres of adulterated ghee and related raw materials during a series of...","search_text":"$7"},{"article_id":"43de8661-2844-46b7-bb39-15eb17f6b82e","slug":"ghee-43de8661-2844-46b7-bb39-15eb17f6b82e","title":"6,500 litres of fake ghee recovered in Delhi, Haryana","source":"assamtribune.com","date":"2026-06-18","url":"https://assamtribune.com/national/6500-litres-of-fake-ghee-recovered-in-delhi-haryana-1612879","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit"],"adulterants":["unidentified oil"],"actions":["seizure","FIR registration"],"locations":["Dwarka, South West Delhi, Delhi, India"],"primary_state":"Delhi","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":10,"excerpt":"New Delhi, June 18: In a major crackdown on a food adulteration network, the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) seized more than 6,500 litres of adulterated ghee and related raw materials during a...","search_text":"$8"},{"article_id":"1c8fe57c-2cee-4f73-a5f3-6ee4051024e7","slug":"ghee-1c8fe57c-2cee-4f73-a5f3-6ee4051024e7","title":"FSSAI seizes over 6,500 litres of suspected adulterated ghee in Delhi, Haryana operations","source":"mumbainews.net","date":"2026-06-18","url":"http://www.mumbainews.net/news/279131828/fssai-seizes-over-6500-litres-of-suspected-adulterated-ghee-in-delhi-haryana-operations","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","mislabeling"],"adulterants":["vegetable oils"],"actions":["seizure","raid","FIR registered"],"locations":["Delhi, Dwarka, India"],"primary_state":"Delhi","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"New Delhi [India], June 18 (ANI): The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) has dismantled an alleged inter-state network involved in the manufacture and distribution of suspected counterfeit ghee,...","search_text":"$9"},{"article_id":"1a066d87-0093-4ca8-9c10-84c004b76c48","slug":"ghee-1a066d87-0093-4ca8-9c10-84c004b76c48","title":"6500 litres of fake ghee found by food regulator during a raid in Delhi and Haryana","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-06-18","url":"https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/new-updates/6500-litres-of-fake-ghee-found-by-food-regulator-during-a-raid-in-delhi-and-haryana/articleshow/131825461.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"provisional","validation_confidence":null,"event_count":2,"claim_statuses":["recall_triggered"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Delhi, India","Haryana, India"],"primary_state":"Delhi","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":14,"excerpt":"Listen to this article in summarized format The action was conducted by Central Food Safety Officers under the supervision of Devesh Kumar Mahla, IPS, Director of the Northern Regional Office of FSSAI, in coordination...","search_text":"$a"},{"article_id":"oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","slug":"oil-dd1aa09a52bacc6f","title":"FDA Crackdown On Adulterated & Banned Food In Vasai-Virar: 18 Shops Sealed, ₹14 Lakh Worth Goods Confiscated","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2026-06-15","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/mumbai/fda-crackdown-on-adulterated-banned-food-in-vasai-virar-18-shops-sealed-14-lakh-worth-goods-confiscated","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.92,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","contamination"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","sealing"],"locations":["Vasai-Virar, Palghar, Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Vasai: Following strict directives from Tukaram Mundhe, Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), a massive crackdown has been launched against adulterated and banned food products within the jurisdiction...","search_text":"$b"},{"article_id":"946d9238-09b9-474e-8481-5e734cedca7a","slug":"ghee-946d9238-09b9-474e-8481-5e734cedca7a","title":"FSSAI issues notices to 14 food brands over allegedly misleading brand names","source":"socialsamosa.com","date":"2026-06-15","url":"https://www.socialsamosa.com/industry-updates/fssai-issues-notices-over-misleading-brand-names-12040501","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.48264755,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["mislabeling"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["notice_issued"],"locations":["India"],"accepted_triplet_count":7,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) has issued notices to 14 food business operators (FBOs) for allegedly using misleading brand names, trade names and product claims in violation of the Food Safety...","search_text":"$c"},{"article_id":"10f36230-190b-4b13-8cfc-8d12c2f37080","slug":"ghee-10f36230-190b-4b13-8cfc-8d12c2f37080","title":"FSSAI issues notices to 14 food companies over misleading ‘healthy,' ‘organic’ claims","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2026-06-14","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/india/2026/Jun/14/fssai-issues-notices-to-14-food-companies-over-misleading-healthy-organic-claims","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.44317229,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["mislabeling"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["notice_issued"],"locations":["India"],"accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":14,"excerpt":"NEW DELHI: The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) on Sunday issued notices to 14 food business operators (FBOs) for allegedly using misleading brand names, trade names and product claims in violation...","search_text":"$d"},{"article_id":"oil-d276b566dce62194","slug":"oil-d276b566dce62194","title":"This toxic adulterant in edible oils can damage your nervous system: Here's how to check if your cooking oil is safe","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-06-11","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/etimes/wellness/this-toxic-adulterant-in-edible-oils-can-damage-your-nervous-system-heres-how-to-check-if-your-cooking-oil-is-safe/photostory/131653846.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.3559,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["mustard oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","contamination"],"adulterants":[],"actions":[],"locations":["Delhi, India"],"primary_state":"Delhi","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":17,"excerpt":"Most people worry about calories when they reach for their cooking oil. Very few think to worry about paralysis. But there is a chemical adulterant that has caused mass poisoning events across multiple continents, left...","search_text":"$e"},{"article_id":"oil-c4d815318f8299b0","slug":"oil-c4d815318f8299b0","title":"Maharashtra FDA Cracks Down On Gutkha And Unsafe Food; 33 Arrested, Goods Worth Over ₹8.56 Crore Seized","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2026-06-09","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/mumbai/maharashtra-fda-cracks-down-on-gutkha-and-unsafe-food-33-arrested-goods-worth-over-856-crore-seized","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","unsafe_food"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":0,"excerpt":"Mumbai, June 9: The Maharashtra Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has continued its statewide crackdown against banned gutkha, pan masala and unsafe food products, resulting in the arrest of 33 persons, sealing of 19...","search_text":"$f"},{"article_id":"oil-055a850c7fce9512","slug":"oil-055a850c7fce9512","title":"Articles worth over Rs 15.8 lakh seized by FDA in week long raids","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-06-05","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/nashik/articles-worth-over-rs-15-8-lakh-seized-by-fda-in-week-long-raids/articleshow/131537623.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["soybean oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","unsafe_food"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Chandwad, Nashik, Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Nashik: The Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) has launched a crackdown on food business operators across Nashik district to ensure consumers receive safe, unadulterated and quality food products. As part of the drive...","search_text":"$10"},{"article_id":"oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","slug":"oil-11313f68b0e0b1d7","title":"Nashik: FDA Seizes Suspected And Illegal Food Stock Worth ₹15.89 Lakh In Week-Long Crackdown","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2026-06-04","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/pune/nashik-fda-seizes-suspected-and-illegal-food-stock-worth-1589-lakh-in-week-long-crackdown","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["soybean oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","unsafe_food"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Chandwad, Nashik, Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"Nashik: The Food and Drug Administration (FDA), Nashik Division, has launched a special campaign to ensure that citizens have access to pure, authentic, and nutritious food products. Under this campaign, during the...","search_text":"$11"},{"article_id":"f502d85e-d523-4b8c-9dec-469aa08204df","slug":"ghee-f502d85e-d523-4b8c-9dec-469aa08204df","title":"Tirupati ghee adulteration case: ED seizes  ₹60-lakh cash in searches","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2026-06-04","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/cities/mumbai-news/tirupati-ghee-adulteration-case-ed-seizes-60-lakh-cash-in-searches-101780514571281.html","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"provisional","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.18764781,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["investigation"],"locations":["India, Tirupati"],"accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":9,"excerpt":"Tirupati ghee adulteration case: ED seizes ₹60-lakh cash in searches Investigators learned that the proceeds of crime had been invested in properties valued at above ₹45 crore, as well as in several immovable properties...","search_text":"$12"},{"article_id":"4f3026f8-7217-4bf9-af6e-71bcad8bb1c5","slug":"ghee-4f3026f8-7217-4bf9-af6e-71bcad8bb1c5","title":"Jalna Factory Raided For Making Fake Ghee, Rs 13 Lakh Stock Seized","source":"rediff.com","date":"2026-06-04","url":"https://www.rediff.com/news/report/fda-seizes-adulterated-ghee-worth-rs-13-lakh-in-jalna/20260604.htm","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["refined soybean oil","synthetic essence"],"actions":["raid","seizure","factory sealed","legal proceedings"],"locations":["Jalna, Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has cracked down on an adulterated ghee manufacturing unit in Jalna, Maharashtra, seizing over Rs 13 lakh worth of fake products and initiating legal proceedings to ensure food...","search_text":"$13"},{"article_id":"f6e3366d-13bc-4a60-94b6-f77a2c2032c0","slug":"ghee-f6e3366d-13bc-4a60-94b6-f77a2c2032c0","title":"ED conducts searches in TTD adulterated ghee case, uncovers assets worth over ₹45 crore","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2026-06-03","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/telangana/ed-conducts-searches-in-ttd-adulterated-ghee-case-uncovers-assets-worth-over-45-crore/article71057364.ece","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["search","seizure"],"locations":["Hyderabad, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"The Directorate of Enforcement (ED), Hyderabad Zonal Office, conducted searches at 15 locations across eight cities on Wednesday, in connection with the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) adulterated ghee case. The...","search_text":"$14"},{"article_id":"efb7c5ac-4ac5-4964-80cb-f95ebaa0e04c","slug":"ghee-efb7c5ac-4ac5-4964-80cb-f95ebaa0e04c","title":"Tirumala ghee adulteration case: ED conducts searches at 15 locations across states","source":"india.com","date":"2026-06-03","url":"https://zeenews.india.com/india/tirumala-ghee-adulteration-case-ed-conducts-searches-at-15-locations-across-states-3052593.html","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.16760051,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","contamination","substitution"],"adulterants":["unspecified"],"actions":["search_and_seizure"],"locations":["Tirumala, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"The Directorate of Enforcement (ED), Hyderabad Zonal Office, on Wednesday conducted search operations at 15 locations across various states in connection with the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) ghee adulteration...","search_text":"$15"},{"article_id":"e8fbbd18-0c64-4437-9ea9-4b4877081943","slug":"ghee-e8fbbd18-0c64-4437-9ea9-4b4877081943","title":"TTD ghee adulteration case: ED raids 15 locations across 6 states, seizes Rs 60 lakh","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-06-03","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/delhi/ttd-ghee-adulteration-case-ed-raids-15-locations-across-6-states-seizes-rs-60-lakh/articleshow/131481541.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"provisional","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.25560864,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["investigation"],"locations":["India, across 6 states"],"accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"NEW DELHI: The Enforcement Directorate (ED) conducted searches at 15 locations across 6 states in connection with the alleged Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) ghee adulteration fraud case on Wednesday. The raids...","search_text":"$16"},{"article_id":"4726ed7e-d61a-4a2c-9e05-59cbaa4f1bf0","slug":"ghee-4726ed7e-d61a-4a2c-9e05-59cbaa4f1bf0","title":"Major crackdown on adulterated ghee and oil in Pokaran; over 14,000kg seized","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-06-03","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/jaipur/major-crackdown-on-adulterated-ghee-and-oil-in-pokaran-over-14000kg-seized/articleshow/131486941.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.90290859,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["ghee","edible oil","palm oil","soybean oil","vanaspati"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["unknown"],"actions":["raid","seizure","detention"],"locations":["Pokaran, Jaisalmer, Rajasthan, India"],"primary_state":"Rajasthan","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"JAISALMER: In a major action under the Rajasthan Governmentâs âShuddh Aahar Milawat Par Vaarâ campaign, authorities raided an illegal adulterated ghee and oil manufacturing unit in Pokaran late Sunday night and seized...","search_text":"$17"},{"article_id":"4661fe17-e88d-41ab-a8c6-9aefcbbaed5c","slug":"ghee-4661fe17-e88d-41ab-a8c6-9aefcbbaed5c","title":"ED raids 15 places in 6 states in Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams ghee adulteration case, Rs 60 lakh seized","source":"indiasnews.net","date":"2026-06-03","url":"http://www.indiasnews.net/news/279099920/ed-raids-15-places-in-6-states-in-tirumala-tirupati-devasthanams-ghee-adulteration-case-rs-60-lakh-seized","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"provisional","validation_confidence":null,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["investigation"],"locations":["India, Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams"],"accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":11,"excerpt":"New Delhi [India], June 3 (ANI): The Enforcement Directorate (ED) on Wednesday carried out searches at 15 locations across Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Uttarakhand, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh and Delhi in connection with the...","search_text":"$18"},{"article_id":"1de4a13b-1497-421e-b5bc-a8ebbc7a3b18","slug":"ghee-1de4a13b-1497-421e-b5bc-a8ebbc7a3b18","title":"TTD ghee scam: ED conducts multi-city searches","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2026-06-03","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/andhra-pradesh/ttd-ghee-scam-ed-conducts-multi-city-searches/article71058127.ece","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.18917535,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution","contamination"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["search_and_seizure","investigation"],"locations":["India"],"accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"The Enforcement Directorate (ED) on Monday conducted searches at 15 locations across Ahilyanagar, Bikaner, Dehradun, Delhi, Dindigul, Guntur, Mumbai, and Roorkee in connection with the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams...","search_text":"$19"},{"article_id":"411b1d1a-7b18-4425-90f0-da2c296625eb","slug":"ghee-411b1d1a-7b18-4425-90f0-da2c296625eb","title":"Study reveals â_x0080__x0098_fake gheeâ_x0080__x0099_ from carrot extract can pass quality tests â_x0080__x0094_ but is it really healthier than real ghee?","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-06-01","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/etimes/wellness/study-reveals-fake-ghee-from-carrot-extract-can-pass-quality-tests-but-is-it-really-healthier-than-real-ghee/articleshow/131433320.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.46606279,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":3,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["research"],"locations":["India"],"accepted_triplet_count":12,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":20,"excerpt":"For Indian families, ghee isnât just one ingredient in the food sitting in our kitchen or at the dining table â itâs part of culture, lore, rituals, Ayurveda, and daily life. This makes ghee adulteration one of the...","search_text":"$1a"},{"article_id":"7855cb39-b177-4d3b-bd72-0a18afd5415b","slug":"ghee-7855cb39-b177-4d3b-bd72-0a18afd5415b","title":"Carrot extract can make fake ghee dodge quality test: study","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2026-05-31","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/science/carrot-extract-can-make-fake-ghee-dodge-quality-test-study/article71044902.ece","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","dilution","substitution"],"adulterants":["carrot extract","palm oil","lard"],"actions":[],"locations":["Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Guwahati The red-orange pigment from carrots can make fake ghee dodge a popular quality test to pass off as a premium product sourced from cows, a new study has found. Researchers from the Indian Institute of Technology...","search_text":"$1b"},{"article_id":"oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","slug":"oil-0deaa05c0dac8925","title":"Nashik FDA confiscates food items worth over Rs 1 lakh on suspicion of adulteration","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-05-30","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/nashik/nashik-fda-confiscates-food-items-worth-over-rs-1-lakh-on-suspicion-of-adulteration/articleshow/131414371.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["soyabean oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Nashik, Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Nashik: Food articles worth over ₹1 lakh were seized in a series of raids carried out by the Nashik Food and Drug Administration (FDA) across multiple locations on May 27, targeting suspected adulterated and unlicensed...","search_text":"$1c"},{"article_id":"980db746-8492-4784-ab7e-f6c3b10378e1","slug":"ghee-980db746-8492-4784-ab7e-f6c3b10378e1","title":"Rajasthan Raid Uncovers Thousands Of Litres Of Adulterated Ghee","source":"rediff.com","date":"2026-05-30","url":"https://www.rediff.com/news/report/adulterated-ghee-seized-in-udaipur-raid/20260530.htm","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.83745003,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","ban"],"locations":["Udaipur, Rajasthan, India, Udaipur, Rajasthan"],"primary_state":"Rajasthan","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":11,"excerpt":"In Udaipur, Rajasthan, a significant raid uncovered approximately 18,000 litres of adulterated ghee, highlighting ongoing concerns about food safety and the importance of regulatory oversight. Key Points - Authorities...","search_text":"$1d"},{"article_id":"7a539249-77a2-4e2b-a29f-6952304d80d7","slug":"ghee-7a539249-77a2-4e2b-a29f-6952304d80d7","title":"76-year-old held for selling adulterated desi ghee in Devbhumi Dwarka","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-05-30","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/rajkot/76-year-old-held-for-selling-adulterated-desi-ghee-in-devbhumi-dwarka/articleshow/131397678.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.87495685,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["chemicals"],"actions":["apprehended","detained","seizure","destroyed"],"locations":["Devbhumi Dwarka, Gujarat, India"],"primary_state":"Gujarat","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"Rajkot: In a crackdown on the illegal sale of adulterated food items, the Special Operations Group (SOG) of Devbhumi Dwarka police apprehended a 76-year-old woman for allegedly selling fake desi ghee. Acting on specific...","search_text":"$1e"},{"article_id":"34dc1c1f-d12c-4230-bb1c-e41b6961f288","slug":"ghee-34dc1c1f-d12c-4230-bb1c-e41b6961f288","title":"Fake ghee racket busted in Surat, raw material worth Rs 3 lakh seized in Kamrej raid","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-05-28","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/surat/cow-ghee-on-the-label-palm-oil-inside/articleshow/131358414.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["vegetable oil","palm oil"],"actions":["raid","seizure","sample collection"],"locations":["Surat, Gujarat, India"],"primary_state":"Gujarat","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"SURAT: A fake ghee manufacturing racket operating from a warehouse in Kamrej taluka was busted by Surat Rural police on Wednesday, with the local crime branch (LCB) seizing raw material and machinery worth about Rs 3...","search_text":"$1f"},{"article_id":"oil-af3a540365afc7c2","slug":"oil-af3a540365afc7c2","title":"Food safety raids at Hyderabad bakery, brewery uncover expired food, pest infestation, hygiene violations","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2026-05-21","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Hyderabad/food-safety-raids-at-hyderabad-bakery-brewery-uncover-expired-food-pest-infestation-hygiene-violations/article71003523.ece","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.3251,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["cooking oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["reused cooking oil"],"actions":["necessary action"],"locations":["Hyderabad, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"Food safety inspections conducted by the Telangana Food Safety department at a bakery and a brewery in Hyderabad’s Nagole area on Wednesday (May 20) uncovered serious hygiene and food safety violations, with officials...","search_text":"$20"},{"article_id":"oil-1c3f4e35a1252449","slug":"oil-1c3f4e35a1252449","title":"4,000 litres of suspected adulterated oil seized | Kanpur News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-05-17","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/kanpur/4000-litres-of-suspected-adulterated-oil-seized/articleshow/131143712.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.9218017301463708,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","custody"],"locations":["Kanpur, Kanpur Dehat, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Kanpur: Police seized around 4,000 litres of suspected adulterated edible oil during a raid near Mantora Bridge in industrial area of Kanpur Dehat on Friday. According to police, the raid was carried out after...","search_text":"$21"},{"article_id":"d8ab6193-0742-4b7e-99ea-f1131b5fc36f","slug":"ghee-d8ab6193-0742-4b7e-99ea-f1131b5fc36f","title":"Another High-Level Committee Constituted on Tirumala Laddu Ghee Row","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2026-05-07","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/andhra-pradesh/another-high-level-committee-constituted-on-tirumala-laddu-ghee-row-1955277","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.21411756,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","prohibited_additive","substandard"],"adulterants":["unknown"],"actions":["committee_formation"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"The committee has been directed to submit its report within one week from the date of issuance of the order TIRUPATI: The state government has constituted a high-level committee to examine and implement the...","search_text":"$22"},{"article_id":"oil-c94e003c369b3450","slug":"oil-c94e003c369b3450","title":"Hyderabad: Food safety inspection flags unsafe oil at KFC outlet in Kondapur","source":"siasat.com","date":"2026-05-05","url":"https://www.siasat.com/hyderabad-food-safety-inspection-flags-unsafe-oil-at-kfc-outlet-in-kondapur-3465689/","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.4695679377765578,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["cooking oil"],"issue_types":["unsafe_food","substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["Action is being initiated against the outlet"],"locations":["Hyderabad, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Hyderabad: A food safety inspection has flagged violations related to cooking oil quality at a KFC outlet in Kondapur. According to food safety authorities, a team conducted a random inspection at the outlet located in...","search_text":"$23"},{"article_id":"cb333cad-a0a7-4971-8f06-e4ca49e58c39","slug":"ghee-cb333cad-a0a7-4971-8f06-e4ca49e58c39","title":"TTD Board Meeting Tomorrow; May Discuss Ghee Panel Report, Seek Action","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2026-05-05","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/andhra-pradesh/ttd-board-meeting-tomorrow-may-discuss-ghee-panel-report-seek-action-1954814","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.23946856,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["substandard ghee"],"actions":["board meeting to discuss findings"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"TTD Board member and BJP leader G. Bhanu Prakash Reddy said he would raise the issue during the board meeting TIRUPATI: A meeting of the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) Trust Board is scheduled on Wednesday. It is...","search_text":"$24"},{"article_id":"e57d61a5-e3ec-423d-ad96-243fbfae502b","slug":"ghee-e57d61a5-e3ec-423d-ad96-243fbfae502b","title":"Admin failures, procedural violations led to TTD ghee adulteration, says one-man panel","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2026-05-03","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/thesundaystandard/2026/May/03/admin-failures-procedural-violations-led-to-ttd-ghee-adulteration-says-one-man-panel","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.64805025,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["lab_confirmed"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["vegetable oils","artificial ghee flavours"],"actions":["Police case registered","Disqualification of vendors"],"locations":["Vijayawada, Krishna, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"VIJAYAWADA: In a major development in the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) ghee adulteration scandal, the findings of the One-Man Committee constituted by Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu have come to light,...","search_text":"$25"},{"article_id":"81f9e1b1-71fd-45a2-9292-017420336059","slug":"ghee-81f9e1b1-71fd-45a2-9292-017420336059","title":"TTD ghee row: AP govt panel submits its report, seeks action on officials | Hyderabad News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-05-03","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/hyderabad/ttd-ghee-row-ap-govt-panel-submits-its-report-seeks-action-on-officials/articleshow/130723782.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.44036205,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["beta-sitosterol"],"actions":["disciplinary and administrative action"],"locations":["Vijayawada, Krishna, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"Vijayawada: The one-man committee appointed by the Andhra Pradesh govt to probe into the alleged supply of adulterated ghee to Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) has submitted its report to the govt. Pointing out...","search_text":"$26"},{"article_id":"445ff19b-5429-4a55-be3f-c4b03481b04f","slug":"ghee-445ff19b-5429-4a55-be3f-c4b03481b04f","title":"Pure ghee or not? TTD procures over 70 lakh kg without mandatory quality tests","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-05-03","url":"https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/india/pure-ghee-or-not-ttd-procured-over-70-lakh-kg-without-mandatory-quality-tests-commission-report/articleshow/130727275.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.9,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.73760578,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard","prohibited_additive"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["probe"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":8,"excerpt":"The report submitted by the commission claimed that this \"systemic failure\" allowed suppliers to provide adulterated ghee, as officials allegedly ignored safety tests and suppressed lab reports that confirmed the...","search_text":"$27"},{"article_id":"747400a0-bfad-4fa2-8004-06f237d1c543","slug":"ghee-747400a0-bfad-4fa2-8004-06f237d1c543","title":"‘70 lakh kg ghee used in Tirupati laddus without testing’: Probe panel points to organised adulteration network","source":"indianexpress.com","date":"2026-05-02","url":"https://indianexpress.com/article/cities/hyderabad/tirumala-laddu-ghee-adulteration-dinesh-kumar-committee-report-ttd-lapses-10667467/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["vegetable oils","additives"],"actions":["blacklisting of all erring suppliers","legal and penal action"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":10,"excerpt":"‘70 lakh kg ghee used in Tirupati laddus without testing’: Probe panel points to organised adulteration network One-man committee formed by Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu alleges extensive...","search_text":"$28"},{"article_id":"oil-42c4efcdce45e35d","slug":"oil-42c4efcdce45e35d","title":"Food safety administration flags substandard food products","source":"nagalandpost.com","date":"2026-04-29","url":"https://nagalandpost.com/food-safety-administration-flags-substandard-food-products/","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.2974,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["Mast Health Multi-source Edible Oil"],"issue_types":["substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["public notice","legal proceedings"],"locations":["Dimapur, Nagaland, India"],"primary_state":"Nagaland","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Food Safety Administration, Dimapur Zone (Dimapur, Niuland, Chumoukedima, Mon and Peren) has issued a public notice identifying several food products as substandard following routine surveillance and laboratory testing...","search_text":"$29"},{"article_id":"67c4a0dd-5f32-4dde-b733-4a4a9e5dfafb","slug":"ghee-67c4a0dd-5f32-4dde-b733-4a4a9e5dfafb","title":"Ghee Purity Check Tips: FSDA declares 6 desi ghee brands unsafe: How to check ghee purity and the easiest way to make ghee at home - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-04-27","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/life-style/food-news/fsda-declares-6-desi-ghee-brands-unsafe-how-to-check-ghee-purity-and-the-easiest-way-to-make-ghee-at-home/articleshow/130544411.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"provisional","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.76634067,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":3,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","ban"],"locations":["India, Aligarh"],"accepted_triplet_count":9,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":19,"excerpt":"Ghee, also known as clarified butter, is an Ayurveda-approved food item highly valued for its medicinal properties. It is believed to promote digestion, boost immunity, and nourish the skin and hair. But, what if the...","search_text":"$2a"},{"article_id":"0b5a50e0-df3b-42ea-83c6-80bc16cf39fb","slug":"ghee-0b5a50e0-df3b-42ea-83c6-80bc16cf39fb","title":"Anwar Qureshi manufactured and sold fake ghee made using animal fat, skin and bones in Khandwa; arrested","source":"opindia.com","date":"2026-04-27","url":"https://www.opindia.com/2026/04/madhya-pradesh-khandwa-police-arrest-anwar-qureshi-fake-ghee-animal-fat-bones-skin-fir-details/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.81924353,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["manufacturing","selling"],"locations":["Khandwa, Madhya Pradesh, India, Khandwa, Madhya Pradesh"],"primary_state":"Madhya Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":5,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"On 24th April, Khandwa Police in Madhya Pradesh arrested a man identified as Anwar Qureshi for manufacturing and selling fake ghee. Qureshi was making the ghee like substance using animal fat, bones and skin. The...","search_text":"$2b"},{"article_id":"d315d00d-a3eb-4c0f-9554-c1395585910f","slug":"ghee-d315d00d-a3eb-4c0f-9554-c1395585910f","title":"Raid Uncovers 3k Litres Ghee Made Using Animal Fat In Madhya Pradesh's Khandwa, 2 Held","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2026-04-24","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/indore/raid-uncovers-3k-litres-ghee-made-using-animal-fat-in-madhya-pradeshs-khandwa-2-held","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.75710264,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal fat"],"actions":["raid","detention","seizure"],"locations":["Khandwa, Madhya Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Madhya Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Khandwa (Madhya Pradesh): A raid on an illegal ghee factory in Khandwa district led to the recovery of around 3,350 litres of adulterated ghee, prepared using animal fat. The operation was carried out by City Magistrate...","search_text":"$2c"},{"article_id":"31f1f824-c698-4b97-a52a-1a1136a9ac6e","slug":"ghee-31f1f824-c698-4b97-a52a-1a1136a9ac6e","title":"AMC health dept busts fake ghee unit in Nikol bungalow","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-04-24","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/ahmedabad/amc-health-dept-busts-fake-ghee-unit-in-nikol-bungalow/articleshow/130477407.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seized","legal_proceedings"],"locations":["India, Nikol area of Ahmedabad"],"accepted_triplet_count":8,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Ahmedabad: On Thursday, the health department of Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation (AMC) carried out a raid at a bungalow situated in the Nikol area of the city, where a unit manufacturing fake ghee was unearthed. In a...","search_text":"$2d"},{"article_id":"oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","slug":"oil-d5d0fcd9c566a8e6","title":"Cyberabad food adulteration raids Hyderabad Rs 64 lakh seizure 28 arrested","source":"indiatoday.in","date":"2026-04-23","url":"https://www.indiatoday.in/cities/hyderabad/story/cyberabad-food-adulteration-raids-hyderabad-rs-64-lakh-seizure-28-arrested-2900680-2026-04-23","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.9327,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Hyderabad, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Food adulteration racket busted in Hyderabad; oil, namkeen worth lakhs seized Sources revealed that the police had major success in seizing 5,026 litres of oil and 5,192 kilograms of wheat during the operation, which...","search_text":"$2e"},{"article_id":"oil-fcda56b4bb45ffd3","slug":"oil-fcda56b4bb45ffd3","title":"Cyberabad Cops Book 28, Seize Adulterated Food Worth Rs 64 Lakh","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2026-04-22","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/telangana/cyberabad-cops-book-28-seize-adulterated-food-worth-rs-64-lakh-1952140","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["booking of persons","seizure of goods"],"locations":["Cyberabad, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Cyberabad Police said strict action will continue against offenders to ensure food safety and protect public health. Hyderabad: Cyberabad Enforcement Wing along with the Special Operations Team (SOT) booked 28 persons...","search_text":"$2f"},{"article_id":"oil-ce4031737a7654b3","slug":"oil-ce4031737a7654b3","title":"22 cases booked in Cyberabad food adulteration crackdown, ₹64 lakh worth goods seized","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2026-04-22","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Hyderabad/22-cases-booked-in-cyberabad-food-adulteration-crackdown-64-lakh-worth-goods-seized/article70892711.ece","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.9433,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["case_booked","seizure"],"locations":["Cyberabad, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":0,"excerpt":"A total of 28 individuals were arrested, and 22 cases were booked by the Cyberabad Enforcement Wing during a series of raids conducted between January 1 and April 21, 2026, targeting food adulteration and illegal food...","search_text":"$30"},{"article_id":"d3c6617c-2925-40b2-aa72-9b0b6c5e83d4","slug":"ghee-d3c6617c-2925-40b2-aa72-9b0b6c5e83d4","title":"Unlicensed dairy unit raided, ghee & milk worth Rs 7 lakh seized","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-04-21","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/hyderabad/unlicensed-dairy-unit-raided-ghee-milk-worth-rs-7-lakh-seized/articleshow/130401443.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.59787099,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["unsafe_food","adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["discarding_unsafe_loose_ghee"],"locations":["Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Hyderabad: Conducting a flying squad inspection at Meghana Foods in Nacharam as part of a special drive, the food safety department seized ghee and packaged milk worth Rs 7.7 lakh, suspecting adulteration, on Monday....","search_text":"$31"},{"article_id":"4216dab3-b436-422a-a6ee-74b5858f7aa2","slug":"ghee-4216dab3-b436-422a-a6ee-74b5858f7aa2","title":"Unit making spurious ghee flourishing for 2 years busted in Sachin GIDC | Surat News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-04-17","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/surat/unit-making-spurious-ghee-flourishing-for-2-years-busted-in-sachin-gidc/articleshow/130316426.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.94293511,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","unsafe_food"],"adulterants":["palm oil","vanaspati","flavouring essence"],"actions":["raid","seizure","arrest"],"locations":["Surat, Gujarat, India"],"primary_state":"Gujarat","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":8,"excerpt":"Surat: The Special Operations Group (SOG) police have busted a duplicate ghee manufacturing unit in Sachin GIDC and seized 2,029 kg of adulterated ghee worth around Rs 15 lakh. Police said the unit had been operating...","search_text":"$32"},{"article_id":"9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","slug":"ghee-9d123ed0-6bda-4c0f-a451-b6ed86c6985c","title":"Gujarat: Massive adulterated ghee racket busted in Surat, 2 arrested ​","source":"thehansindia.com","date":"2026-04-16","url":"https://www.thehansindia.com/news/national/gujarat-massive-adulterated-ghee-racket-busted-in-surat-2-arrested--1066385","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.98,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution","masking"],"adulterants":["palm oil","vegetable ghee","vegetable butter","artificial essence"],"actions":["raid","seizure","arrest","case registration"],"locations":["Surat, Gujarat, India"],"primary_state":"Gujarat","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":12,"excerpt":"Surat: Officials in Surat have seized 2,029 kilograms of adulterated ghee and arrested two men after raiding a manufacturing unit in the Sachin GIDC area as part of a targeted crackdown on food adulteration. The Special...","search_text":"$33"},{"article_id":"oil-c0e8fd0149fa83c4","slug":"oil-c0e8fd0149fa83c4","title":"Food Adulteration: Barnala admin imposes Rs 2L fine","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-04-12","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/chandigarh/food-adulteration-barnala-admin-imposes-rs-2l-fine/articleshow/130198058.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["mustard oil","cooking oil"],"issue_types":["substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["Rs 2.25 lakh fine"],"locations":["Barnala, Punjab, India"],"primary_state":"Punjab","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Bathinda: The Barnala district administration has imposed a fine amounting to Rs 2.25 lakh in seven cases of selling substandard food products. The fines were imposed under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. These...","search_text":"$34"},{"article_id":"ea51c75b-4b85-48fb-bbb7-8fde23c110aa","slug":"ghee-ea51c75b-4b85-48fb-bbb7-8fde23c110aa","title":"Hyderabad turning into capital of adulterated food","source":"thehansindia.com","date":"2026-04-08","url":"https://www.thehansindia.com/telangana/hyderabad-turning-into-capital-of-adulterated-food-1063581","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.42255961,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["palm oil","vanaspati","low-quality products"],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Hyderabad, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":7,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":11,"excerpt":"Hyderabad: Let’s begin with some good news: In 2019, UNESCO designated Hyderabad as a \"Creative City of Gastronomy\" for its rich culinary heritage, blending Telugu, Mughlai, Persian, and Turkish influences. As a topping...","search_text":"$35"},{"article_id":"oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","slug":"oil-48d56f0dc43d0ecc","title":"Expired Mustard Oil Seized in Hazaribag Food Safety Raid | Ranchi News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-04-07","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/ranchi/expired-mustard-oil-seized-in-hazaribag-food-safety-raid/articleshow/130094279.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.7962744115817022,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["mustard oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","prohibited_additive"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","legal action"],"locations":["Hazaribag, Jharkhand, India"],"primary_state":"Jharkhand","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"Hazaribag: Acting on directives of DC Shashi Prakash Singh and additional chief medical officer Dr Shashi Jaiswal, a food safety team conducted a surprise raid at a Barhi-based business firm on Tuesday, uncovering a...","search_text":"$36"},{"article_id":"194f3e22-f4b6-483b-9333-762c3a3b6b9d","slug":"ghee-194f3e22-f4b6-483b-9333-762c3a3b6b9d","title":"MP News: Over 2K Food Samples Fail Safety Tests Across State-- Highest 400 From Gwalior; Dairy Products & Sweets Among Most Adulterated","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2026-04-01","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/bhopal/mp-news-over-2k-food-samples-fail-safety-tests-across-state-highest-400-from-gwalior-dairy-products-sweets-among-most-adulterated","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.31398584,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":[],"locations":["Gwalior, Madhya Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Madhya Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":7,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Bhopal (Madhya Pradesh): Over 2,000 food samples have failed safety tests across Madhya Pradesh. According to a report by the Food and Drug Administration, the highest number of failed samples, around 420, were reported...","search_text":"$37"},{"article_id":"oil-97103cc7b062d80c","slug":"oil-97103cc7b062d80c","title":"Over 5,000 litres of adulterated cooking oil seized in Gachibowli; expired wheat flour repackaged for sale","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2026-03-10","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Hyderabad/over-5000-litres-of-adulterated-cooking-oil-seized-in-gachibowli-expired-wheat-flour-repackaged-for-sale/article70724996.ece","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.921465990480022,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["cooking oil","soybean oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["expired cooking oil"],"actions":["seizure","raid"],"locations":["Hyderabad, Gachibowli, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"Thousands of litres of adulterated cooking oil and wheat flour were seized during raids carried out by the Madhapur Special Operations Team (SOT) at two locations in Hyderabad on Monday (March 9, 2026). The accused were...","search_text":"$38"},{"article_id":"oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","slug":"oil-8826c3388f25a8b2","title":"Adulterated cooking oil, wheat flour worth Rs 21 lakh seized in Hyderabad","source":"siasat.com","date":"2026-03-10","url":"https://www.siasat.com/adulterated-cooking-oil-wheat-flour-worth-rs-21-lakh-seized-in-hyderabad-3432488/","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8719484829011432,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["cooking oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard","mislabeling"],"adulterants":["expired cooking oil"],"actions":["raid","seizure"],"locations":["Hyderabad, Gachibowli, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Hyderabad: The Madhapur Special Operations Team conducted raids at two locations in Hyderabad on Monday, March 9. During the raid, thousands of litres of adulterated cooking oil and wheat flour were seized. In the case,...","search_text":"$39"},{"article_id":"edf6b48c-90dc-4757-814e-999556997808","slug":"ghee-edf6b48c-90dc-4757-814e-999556997808","title":"Telangana Vijaya Dairy alleges adulteration in AP ‘Vijaya’ ghee","source":"thehansindia.com","date":"2026-03-10","url":"https://www.thehansindia.com/andhra-pradesh/telangana-vijaya-dairy-alleges-adulteration-in-ap-vijaya-ghee-1055114","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.43926564,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["vegetable oil"],"actions":["complaint filed"],"locations":["Hyderabad, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Vijayawada: Telangana Vijaya Dairy chief Gutta Amith Reddy made sensational allegations against the popular Andhra Pradesh Vijaya Dairy brand, stating that ghee sold under the Vijaya Dairy label by the Andhra Pradesh...","search_text":"$3a"},{"article_id":"f4c53608-9890-4b9f-89a3-7c1028bc1e05","slug":"ghee-f4c53608-9890-4b9f-89a3-7c1028bc1e05","title":"Mandvi cops bust unit making spurious ghee | Surat News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-03-06","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/surat/mandvi-cops-bust-unit-making-spurious-ghee/articleshow/129168759.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.89921563,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seized"],"locations":["India, Khedpur village near Mandvi in Surat district"],"accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Surat: A Mandvi police team on Thursday busted an alleged spurious ghee manufacturing unit at Khedpur village near Mandvi in Surat district and seized 810kg of adulterated ghee worth around Rs 6.65 lakh. Police also...","search_text":"$3b"},{"article_id":"1a806023-ac1d-4da2-924e-25821c2554f5","slug":"ghee-1a806023-ac1d-4da2-924e-25821c2554f5","title":"Tirumala ghee row triggers political firestorm in Council","source":"thehansindia.com","date":"2026-03-05","url":"https://www.thehansindia.com/andhra-pradesh/tirumala-ghee-row-triggers-political-firestorm-in-council-1053822","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.24725438,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["external_testing"],"locations":["Tirumala, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":0,"excerpt":"Vijayawada: The Tirumala laddu adulteration controversy sparked a heated debate in the Legislative Council on Wednesday with YSRCP members accusing the ruling NDA coalition of politicising the issue and alleged a nexus...","search_text":"$3c"},{"article_id":"696bb9a6-aa69-4de4-a566-5df21482bc51","slug":"ghee-696bb9a6-aa69-4de4-a566-5df21482bc51","title":"Dairy Unit Selling Spurious Ghee Raided","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2026-03-04","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/telangana/hyderabad-police-nabs-businessman-for-preparing-adulterated-dairy-products-1941414","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["recall_triggered"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["India, Hyderabad"],"accepted_triplet_count":8,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"The police seized a vast quantity of adulterated dairy products and manufacturing equipment. This includes 460 kgs of ghee, 70 kgs of mixed ghee, 2,090 kgs of cow cream, and 1,170 kgs of buffalo cream Hyderabad: Police...","search_text":"$3d"},{"article_id":"28a03096-e60c-4adb-b4fa-55f0bd28a95d","slug":"ghee-28a03096-e60c-4adb-b4fa-55f0bd28a95d","title":"Hyderabad: Over 3,700 kg of adulterated dairy products seized in Banjara Hills","source":"siasat.com","date":"2026-03-04","url":"https://www.siasat.com/rs-18-26-l-worth-adulterated-dairy-products-seized-in-banjara-hills-3415111/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.92989608,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["palm oil","vanaspati"],"actions":["seizure","arrest","case registration"],"locations":["Hyderabad, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":5,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"Hyderabad: Police seized approximately 3,790 kilograms of adulterated dairy products worth Rs 18.26 lakhs on Wednesday, March 4, in Banjara Hills, Hyderabad. The accused, Mohammed Junaid Hussain, illegally manufactured...","search_text":"$3e"},{"article_id":"6ab671c9-310c-4d88-bd88-0251180b2345","slug":"ghee-6ab671c9-310c-4d88-bd88-0251180b2345","title":"One-Man Panel Begins Probe into TTD Laddu Ghee Irregularities","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2026-03-03","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/andhra-pradesh/one-man-panel-begins-probe-into-ttd-laddu-ghee-irregularities-1941294","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.12679826,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee","Srivari laddu prasadam"],"issue_types":["adulteration","prohibited_additive","substandard"],"adulterants":["adulterated ghee"],"actions":["probe","disciplinary action"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"It has been asked to submit its report within 45 days TIRUPATI: The one-man commission constituted by the state government to examine administrative lapses and irregularities in the procurement and use of adulterated...","search_text":"$3f"},{"article_id":"oil-d479413f1e610f85","slug":"oil-d479413f1e610f85","title":"FSDA seizes adulterated food worth  ₹12.34 crore in UP","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2026-03-02","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/cities/lucknow-news/fsda-seizes-adulterated-food-worth-12-34-crore-in-up-101772463235324.html","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.862371830448324,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["Seizure of adulterated food and oil"],"locations":["Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"FSDA seizes adulterated food worth ₹12.34 crore in UP VP Singh, FSDA assistant commissioner, said strict action is being taken against those involved in misbranding, adulteration and sale of substandard food products....","search_text":"$40"},{"article_id":"oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","slug":"oil-af7d37f8450fbc59","title":"Kanpur Adulterated Food: Pre-Holi raids in Kanpur: FSDA seizes 9 quintals of adulterated mawa & edible oil worth Rs 29L | Kanpur News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-02-26","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/kanpur/9-quintals-of-adulterated-mawa-edible-oil-seized-ahead-of-holi/articleshow/128794157.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8388143717855862,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["unspecified adulterant"],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":10,"excerpt":"KANPUR: In a crackdown on food adulteration ahead of Holi, the Food Security and Drug Administration (FSDA) department on Wednesday seized adulterated mawa and edible oil worth Rs 29.08 lakh and destroyed a large...","search_text":"$41"},{"article_id":"oil-1852e8a212bd5903","slug":"oil-1852e8a212bd5903","title":"Holi Crackdown: 30,000 Oil Packs Seized, Tonnes Of Fake Paneer Destroyed Across Uttar Pradesh","source":"businesstoday.in","date":"2026-02-26","url":"https://www.businesstoday.in/bt-tv/whats-hot/video/holi-crackdown-30000-oil-packs-seized-tonnes-of-fake-paneer-destroyed-across-uttar-pradesh-518082-2026-02-26?utm_source=rssfeed","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.4750736034499782,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Kanpur Dehat, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Ahead of Holi, authorities in Uttar Pradesh have intensified a statewide crackdown on adulterated food items to ensure festive food safety. Food Safety teams conducted raids across multiple districts, targeting fake...","search_text":"$42"},{"article_id":"f289c668-0c40-41e6-82af-ae6829b262d4","slug":"ghee-f289c668-0c40-41e6-82af-ae6829b262d4","title":"The ghee keeping Andhra on the boil","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2026-02-25","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/opinion/op-ed/the-ghee-keeping-andhra-on-the-boil/article70671461.ece","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.23732525,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["beef tallow","palm oil","refined palm oil"],"actions":["charge sheet filed"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":11,"excerpt":"The alleged adulteration of the ghee used for the laddu prasadam at the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) has been in the news for more than a year for all the wrong reasons. The controversy began in September 2024...","search_text":"$43"},{"article_id":"b26721cc-ba4b-460e-a726-17bebda4c82e","slug":"ghee-b26721cc-ba4b-460e-a726-17bebda4c82e","title":"20 crore Tirupati laddus made using ghee 'adulterated with chemicals' during YSRCP govt: Andhra CM Naidu","source":"deccanherald.com","date":"2026-02-25","url":"https://www.deccanherald.com/india/andhra-pradesh/20-crore-tirupati-laddus-made-using-ghee-adulterated-with-chemicals-during-ysrcp-govt-andhra-cm-naidu-3911464","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.31586586,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["chemicals"],"actions":[],"locations":["Tirupati, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"20 crore Tirupati laddus made using ghee 'adulterated with chemicals' during YSRCP govt: Andhra CM Naidu The chief minister alleged that after indulging in this adulteration, the opposition party leaders are maligning...","search_text":"20 crore Tirupati laddus made using ghee 'adulterated with chemicals' during YSRCP govt: Andhra CM Naidu deccanherald.com 20 crore Tirupati laddus made using ghee 'adulterated with chemicals' during YSRCP govt: Andhra CM Naidu\nThe chief minister alleged that after indulging in this adulteration, the opposition party leaders are maligning Heritage Foods, a dairy company run by his family. ghee adulteration chemicals alleged Tirupati, Andhra Pradesh, India ghee fflo:hasAdulterant chemicals ghee 'adulterated with chemicals' Tirupati laddu fflo:hasAdulterant chemicals laddus made using ghee 'adulterated with chemicals'"},{"article_id":"0932679a-fe82-4a1e-949e-9d4fd17ed2a0","slug":"ghee-0932679a-fe82-4a1e-949e-9d4fd17ed2a0","title":"Tirumala Laddu Ghee Adulteration: Naidu, Pawan alleges organised conspiracy behind Tirumala laddu ghee adulteration | Vijayawada News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-02-25","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/vijayawada/naidu-pawan-alleges-organised-conspiracy-behind-tirumala-laddu-ghee-adulteration/articleshow/128759552.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.21264817,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee","laddu"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["adulterated ghee"],"actions":["chargesheet filing"],"locations":["Tirumala, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"Vijayawada: Andhra Pradesh chief minister N Chandrababu Naidu on Tuesday alleged in the Legislative Assembly that an organised conspiracy was behind the adulteration of ghee used in preparing Tirumala laddu prasadam...","search_text":"$44"},{"article_id":"96adc5c1-5a68-473e-9d38-85bed792c8fc","slug":"ghee-96adc5c1-5a68-473e-9d38-85bed792c8fc","title":"Tirupati TTD temple to get Rs 25 crore French ‘e-tongue, e-nose’ to test prasadam ghee quality","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-02-24","url":"https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/new-updates/tirupati-ttd-temple-to-get-rs-25-crore-french-e-tongue-e-nose-to-test-prasadam-ghee-quality/articleshow/128743938.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.15570435,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["chargesheet"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":0,"excerpt":"TTD administers the world-famous Sri Venkateswara Swamy temple in Tirupati, where lakhs of devotees consume the sacred laddu prasadam every day. A row had erupted in 2024 after it was claimed that adulterated ghee was...","search_text":"$45"},{"article_id":"83bf777b-6ee5-4e82-bd85-6e374853473a","slug":"ghee-83bf777b-6ee5-4e82-bd85-6e374853473a","title":"Tirumala laddu ghee row set for stormy debate in Legislature","source":"thehansindia.com","date":"2026-02-24","url":"https://www.thehansindia.com/andhra-pradesh/tirumala-laddu-ghee-row-set-for-stormy-debate-in-legislature-1051239","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.17635121,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal fat","chemically manufactured substance"],"actions":["constituted a one-man committee to determine administrative responsibility"],"locations":["Tirumala, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Vijayawada: The politically sensitive Tirumala laddu adulterated ghee controversy is set to come up for a full-fledged discussion in state Legislature this week, with the state government announcing that the issue will...","search_text":"$46"},{"article_id":"64902247-dbff-448d-987f-c89ac2e30538","slug":"ghee-64902247-dbff-448d-987f-c89ac2e30538","title":"CBI-SIT Probe Shows No Milk Used in Making Ghee for Tirumala Prasadam: Deputy CM","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2026-02-24","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/andhra-pradesh/cbi-sit-probe-shows-no-milk-used-in-making-ghee-for-tirumala-prasadam-deputy-cm-1939590","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.3887361,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["investigation"],"locations":["India, Tirumala"],"accepted_triplet_count":6,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Quoting the findings of the SIT, the Deputy Chief Minister said the ghee was found to have been produced using palm oil and some chemicals --instead of from milk fat. Vijayawada: In a sensational disclosure in the...","search_text":"$47"},{"article_id":"54637d34-f16e-4e98-84c1-681a0fca559c","slug":"ghee-54637d34-f16e-4e98-84c1-681a0fca559c","title":"20 crore Tirumala laddus made with adulterated ghee, Naidu tells Assembly","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2026-02-24","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/andhra-pradesh/20-crore-tirumala-laddus-made-with-adulterated-ghee-naidu-tells-assembly/article70671756.ece","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee","Tirumala laddu"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["adulterated ghee"],"actions":["case registered"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":9,"excerpt":"Chief Minister N. Chandrababu Naidu stated in the Legislative Assembly that nearly 20 crore Tirumala laddus were prepared using adulterated ghee during the previous regime, describing the episode as a “Mahapaapam”...","search_text":"$48"},{"article_id":"1933f8f5-8812-4e24-85bd-cdbdc83f929e","slug":"ghee-1933f8f5-8812-4e24-85bd-cdbdc83f929e","title":"Over 20 crore Laddus Were Made With Adulterated Ghee: Chandrababu Naidu","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2026-02-24","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/andhra-pradesh/over-20-crore-laddus-were-made-with-adulterated-ghee-chandrababu-naidu-1939513","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.20724143,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["adulterated ghee"],"actions":["SIT constituted"],"locations":["Tirumala, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"To avoid political controversy, a Special Investigation Team (SIT) was constituted with Central and state government officials. The Supreme Court suggested that the SIT should be monitored by CBI Chief Minister N....","search_text":"$49"},{"article_id":"oil-898a1362002b727d","slug":"oil-898a1362002b727d","title":"Food safety teams seize adulterated khoya in Agra, edible oil in Mânagar | Agra News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-02-22","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/agra/food-safety-teams-seize-adulterated-khoya-in-agra-edible-oil-in-mnagar/articleshow/128652372.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.929834459709838,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil","mustard oil","rice bran oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["colouring material"],"actions":["seizure","premises sealed","criminal proceedings likely"],"locations":["Muzaffarnagar, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":9,"excerpt":"Agra: As part of an ongoing crackdown on food adulteration, authorities seized and destroyed 1,320 kg of adulterated khoya in Agra and confiscated nearly 12,000 litres of adulterated edible oil in Muzaffarnagar over the...","search_text":"$4a"},{"article_id":"1ae756d4-675e-4a08-bc7d-ba6a3e922d5d","slug":"ghee-1ae756d4-675e-4a08-bc7d-ba6a3e922d5d","title":"Bikaner raid seizes 765kg adulterated ghee | Jaipur News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-02-22","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/jaipur/bikaner-raid-seizes-765kg-adulterated-ghee/articleshow/128655523.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.84904601,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["India, Nokha town, Bikaner district"],"accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Jaipur: The health dept Saturday busted a unit allegedly producing adulterated ghee in Nokha town of Bikaner district and seized 765 kg stock during the raid. Food safety commissioner T Shubhmangala said a team led by...","search_text":"$4b"},{"article_id":"e7a8eb39-66a7-4777-a0d6-cfb00f8f0798","slug":"ghee-e7a8eb39-66a7-4777-a0d6-cfb00f8f0798","title":"Former TTD Chief Calls One-Man Panel On Ghee Issue A Political Move","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2026-02-20","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/andhra-pradesh/former-ttd-chief-calls-one-man-panel-on-ghee-issue-a-political-move-1938695","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.2231745,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["probe"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":0,"excerpt":"Addressing the media here, Bhumana said the commission had been constituted despite an ongoing CBI-SIT inquiry into the issue: Reports TIRUPATI: Former Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) chairman and YSRC) senior...","search_text":"$4c"},{"article_id":"oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","slug":"oil-a4f6b6de8fcb2c3d","title":"Sale of adulterated coconut oil: farmers elated over SHRC’s intervention","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2026-02-19","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/kerala/sale-of-adulterated-coconut-oil-farmers-elated-over-shrcs-intervention/article70651539.ece","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8516265033531835,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["coconut oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":["adulterated coconut oil"],"actions":["urgent inquiry directive"],"locations":["Kozhikode, Kerala, India"],"primary_state":"Kerala","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":8,"excerpt":"Farmers in the upland areas of Kozhikode district have welcomed the intervention of the State Human Rights Commission (SHRC) following complaints regarding the alleged large-scale manufacture and sale of adulterated...","search_text":"$4d"},{"article_id":"c7589046-9f75-46b4-bd78-c3fe0703df52","slug":"ghee-c7589046-9f75-46b4-bd78-c3fe0703df52","title":"Jagan slams Naidu over â_x0080__x0098_inflatedâ_x0080__x0099_ budget, says TTD ghee scam happened in Naiduâ_x0080__x0099_s tenure | Vijayawada News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-02-19","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/vijayawada/jagan-slams-naidu-over-inflated-budget-says-ttd-ghee-scam-happened-in-naidus-tenure/articleshow/128564095.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.3650846,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["adulterated ghee"],"actions":["alleged"],"locations":["Vijayawada, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":0,"excerpt":"Vijayawada: YSRCP president and former chief minister Y S Jagan Mohan Reddy alleged that the state budget for 2026-27 was \"a bundle of lies\" and accused chief minister N Chandrababu Naidu of attempting to divert...","search_text":"$4e"},{"article_id":"84512e93-e51a-4c89-88dd-ecc2afc0699a","slug":"ghee-84512e93-e51a-4c89-88dd-ecc2afc0699a","title":"Ready for Debate on TTD Ghee Issue in assembly: AP Home Minister","source":"thehansindia.com","date":"2026-02-18","url":"https://www.thehansindia.com/andhra-pradesh/ready-for-debate-on-ttd-ghee-issue-in-assembly-ap-home-minister-1049699","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.9,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.26274866,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["chemicals"],"actions":["debate in assembly"],"locations":["Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":0,"excerpt":"Andhra Pradesh Home Minister Vangalapudi Anitha stated that the government is prepared to debate the TTD adulterated ghee matter in the Assembly. She challenged YSRCP members to present evidence and affirmed the...","search_text":"$4f"},{"article_id":"95b8351c-9ddb-457d-9035-ad3b6d181dc7","slug":"ghee-95b8351c-9ddb-457d-9035-ad3b6d181dc7","title":"Ghee supplied to Dwaraka Tirumala was likely adulterated: SIT chargesheet | Vijayawada News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-02-13","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/vijayawada/ghee-supplied-to-dwaraka-tirumala-was-likely-adulterated-sit-chargesheet/articleshow/128271669.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.42497089,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["unspecified"],"actions":["chargesheet filed"],"locations":["Eluru, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Rajahmundry: The special investigation team (SIT), in its supplementary chargesheet, has stated that the ghee supplied to Dwaraka Tirumala temple in Eluru district was likely adulterated. It said that during 2022-23,...","search_text":"$50"},{"article_id":"oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5","slug":"oil-fce8e94a4d2c92b5","title":"McDonald’s Outlet In Jaipur Under Scanner After Food Safety Violations Found During Surprise Check; 40 Litres Of Oil & 40 Kgs Rotten Tomatoes Destroyed","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2026-02-11","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/viral/mcdonalds-outlet-in-jaipur-under-scanner-after-food-safety-violations-found-during-surprise-check-40-liters-of-oil-40-kgs-rotten-tomatoes-destroyed","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["palm oil"],"issue_types":["unsafe_food","substandard"],"adulterants":["Total Polar Compounds"],"actions":["destruction of oil","formal improvement notice"],"locations":["Jaipur, Rajasthan, India"],"primary_state":"Rajasthan","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"Jaipur: In a surprise inspection conducted on Monday, food safety officials from the Rajasthan health department uncovered serious hygiene and food safety lapses at a McDonald’s outlet located in Gaurav Tower, Jaipur....","search_text":"$51"},{"article_id":"f5c77efa-f72b-424c-a810-81cd552ba3de","slug":"ghee-f5c77efa-f72b-424c-a810-81cd552ba3de","title":"Hindu groups, seers protest Tirumala ghee ‘adulteration’","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2026-02-11","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/india-news/hindu-groups-seers-protest-tirumala-ghee-adulteration-101770754545423.html","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.1749002,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","mislabeling","prohibited_additive"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["investigation_under_prevention_of_money_laundering_act"],"locations":["Tirupati, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"Hindu groups, seers protest Tirumala ghee ‘adulteration’ Hindu groups protested in Tirupati over alleged ghee adulteration in temple offerings, demanding accountability and a probe into mismanagement by TTD officials....","search_text":"$52"},{"article_id":"3e2829b3-2380-49cb-a370-77a313e8eaa1","slug":"ghee-3e2829b3-2380-49cb-a370-77a313e8eaa1","title":"JSP demands action against YSRCP in Tirumala ghee adulteration issue","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2026-02-10","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/andhra-pradesh/jsp-demands-action-against-ysrcp-in-tirumala-ghee-adulteration-issue/article70613701.ece","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.16004847,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee","Tirumala Laddu Prasadam"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["adulterated ghee"],"actions":[],"locations":["Tirumala, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":0,"excerpt":"Jana Sena Party (JSP) senior leaders Avanapu Vikram and Avanapu Bhavana on Tuesday (February 10, 2026) urged the government to initiate stern action against YSRCP leaders, who they charged were responsible for the usage...","search_text":"$53"},{"article_id":"2010c6e2-c9cb-4a3e-b22b-8cabf1044074","slug":"ghee-2010c6e2-c9cb-4a3e-b22b-8cabf1044074","title":"ED to probe money laundering in adulterated Tirupati laddu scam","source":"thehindubusinessline.com","date":"2026-02-10","url":"https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/news/ed-to-probe-money-laundering-in-adulterated-tirupati-laddu-scam/article70616167.ece","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.2591818,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["animal fat","palm oil","palm stearin"],"actions":["money laundering case"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":11,"excerpt":"After the CBI-led Special Investigation Team (SIT), the Enforcement Directorate has also jumped into the fray and registered a money laundering case to investigate adulteration of ‘laddu’ sweets offered as prasad at the...","search_text":"$54"},{"article_id":"3e325b99-7611-4f89-8963-7f79c5ac4105","slug":"ghee-3e325b99-7611-4f89-8963-7f79c5ac4105","title":"7.5k ltr spurious ghee seized in Jodhpur | Jaipur News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-02-08","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/jaipur/7-5k-ltr-spurious-ghee-seized-in-jodhpur/articleshow/128046035.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["palm oil"],"actions":["raid","seizure","detention","investigation"],"locations":["Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India"],"primary_state":"Rajasthan","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Jodhpur: The Commissioner Special Team (CST) on Saturday raided a ghee supplier and seized 7,500 litres of spurious ghee. Police, acting on information, reached the spot and recovered palm oil, tins filled with...","search_text":"$55"},{"article_id":"e70df749-9305-44b3-8a30-defc332a7fa4","slug":"ghee-e70df749-9305-44b3-8a30-defc332a7fa4","title":"Tirumala Laddu Row: Andhra CM Naidu claims bathroom cleaning chemicals used in the ghee meant for Tirupati laddu","source":"india.com","date":"2026-02-07","url":"https://zeenews.india.com/india/tirumala-laddu-row-andhra-cm-naidu-claims-bathroom-cleaning-chemicals-used-in-the-ghee-meant-for-tirupati-laddu-3014480.html","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.14960197,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["bathroom cleaning chemicals","plant oils","chemicals"],"actions":[],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu on Friday claimed that \"bathroom cleaning chemicals\" were used to adulterate the ghee meant for making of laddu prasadam at Tirupati Tirumala Devasthanams (TTD) during...","search_text":"$56"},{"article_id":"8e0f3d53-2c44-474d-9787-4713b7050c28","slug":"ghee-8e0f3d53-2c44-474d-9787-4713b7050c28","title":"Korean Monoglycerides Used For Adulteration of Ghee Supplied To TTD","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2026-02-07","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/andhra-pradesh/korean-monoglycerides-used-for-adulteration-of-ghee-supplied-to-ttd-1935626","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.53706537,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":3,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["SIT probe revealed that adulterated ghee was supplied for the manufacturing of the laddu prasadam at Tirumala.","The SIT is yet to investigate in depth into the issue.","SIT probe revealed that the adulterated ghee was produced mixing palm oil, palm kernel oil, monoglycerides, Betacarotene, acetic acid ester, and lactic acid."],"locations":["India, Tirumala temple"],"accepted_triplet_count":7,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Bhole Baba Dairy which supplied ghee to the TTD during the YSRC rule, was found to have heavily used monoglycerides, a chemical substance, in the ghee Sourced From Korea, the Special Investigation Team (SIT) probe...","search_text":"$57"},{"article_id":"81b21166-1d16-4aec-910f-b382f9680f5f","slug":"ghee-81b21166-1d16-4aec-910f-b382f9680f5f","title":"SIT faces questions over â_x0080__x0098_shortcomingsâ_x0080__x0099_ in Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration probe | Vijayawada News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-02-07","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/vijayawada/sit-faces-questions-over-shortcomings-in-tirupati-laddu-ghee-adulteration-probe/articleshow/128002821.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.23039858,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["mono-glycerides","lactic acid"],"actions":["chargesheet_filed"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Vijayawada: Amid allegations and counter-allegations between ruling and opposition parties over the laddu ghee adulteration case, the special investigation team (SIT) is now faced with multiple questions, with leaders...","search_text":"$58"},{"article_id":"b40ee428-0e50-4a51-aca9-a9074c0486cf","slug":"ghee-b40ee428-0e50-4a51-aca9-a9074c0486cf","title":"Naidu Accuses Previous YSRC Govt of Using Ghee Made with Bathroom Chemicals for Tirupati Laddus","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2026-02-06","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/andhra-pradesh/naidu-accuses-previous-ysrcp-govt-of-using-ghee-made-with-bathroom-chemicals-for-tirupati-laddus-1935390","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.26140705,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["bathroom chemicals"],"actions":[],"locations":["Kalugotla, Kurnool, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"Naidu Accuses Previous YSRC Govt of Using Ghee Made with Bathroom Chemicals for Tirupati Laddus The chief minister alleged that the previous government tried to undermine the prestige of Lord Venkateswara Swamy with...","search_text":"$59"},{"article_id":"a9c15856-f188-45d4-80a8-7929118af59a","slug":"ghee-a9c15856-f188-45d4-80a8-7929118af59a","title":"CM Chandrababu Naidu alleges attempt to tarnish TTD’s sanctity through adulterated laddu prasadam","source":"thehansindia.com","date":"2026-02-06","url":"https://www.thehansindia.com/andhra-pradesh/cm-chandrababu-naidu-alleges-attempt-to-tarnish-ttds-sanctity-through-adulterated-laddu-prasadam-1046042","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["cleaning substances"],"actions":[],"locations":["Kurnool, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Kurnool: Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N. Chandrababu Naidu on Friday alleged that a systematic attempt was made to damage the sanctity and reputation of Lord Sri Venkateswara Swamy by preparing Laddu prasadam using...","search_text":"$5a"},{"article_id":"867c2a12-155a-4309-aff0-300c6125824c","slug":"ghee-867c2a12-155a-4309-aff0-300c6125824c","title":"Pawan: SIT confirmed presence of animal fat Tirumala laddu ghee","source":"thehansindia.com","date":"2026-02-06","url":"https://www.thehansindia.com/andhra-pradesh/pawan-sit-confirmed-presence-of-animal-fat-tirumala-laddu-ghee-1045910","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.13920382,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee","Tirumala Srivari Laddu Prasadam"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal fat"],"actions":[],"locations":["Vijayawada, Krishna, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"Vijayawada: Deputy Chief Minister Pawan Kalyan on Thursday said that the Special Investigation Team (SIT) report had clearly confirmed the presence of animal fat in the ghee used for preparing Tirumala Srivari Laddu...","search_text":"$5b"},{"article_id":"432f2c6e-3092-44cd-bf1b-54249b31ad6b","slug":"ghee-432f2c6e-3092-44cd-bf1b-54249b31ad6b","title":"Pawan Kalyan, Finance Minister, Madhav Say No CBI Clean Chit in Tirumala Ghee Case","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2026-02-06","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/andhra-pradesh/pawan-kalyan-finance-minister-madhav-say-no-cbi-clean-chit-in-tirumala-ghee-case-1935295","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.21755027,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["CBI investigation"],"locations":["India, Tirumala"],"accepted_triplet_count":6,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Deputy CM says laddus prepared with adulterated ghee had even been sent for consecration of the Ram Mandir in Ayodhya. Vijayawada: Deputy Chief Minister K. Pawan Kalyan, Finance minister Payyavula Keshav and AP BJP...","search_text":"$5c"},{"article_id":"dc9b6179-78d1-4eec-9df7-47aadc6c4002","slug":"ghee-dc9b6179-78d1-4eec-9df7-47aadc6c4002","title":"Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration case: SIT indicates tender norms were diluted, reports suppressed","source":"indianexpress.com","date":"2026-02-05","url":"https://indianexpress.com/article/india/tirupati-laddu-ghee-adulteration-case-sit-tender-norms-diluted-reports-suppressed-10514888/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.23214724,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["lab_confirmed"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","prohibited_additive","substandard"],"adulterants":["unspecified"],"actions":["transfer_of_officials","investigation"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration case: SIT indicates tender norms were diluted, reports suppressed In an 11-page letter outlining its allegations, the SIT has called on the Andhra Pradesh govt to take stringent action...","search_text":"$5d"},{"article_id":"bcd80071-6449-4036-accf-62939d2bc771","slug":"ghee-bcd80071-6449-4036-accf-62939d2bc771","title":"Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration: SIT flags violations, irregularities, misconduct - BusinessToday","source":"businesstoday.in","date":"2026-02-05","url":"https://www.businesstoday.in/india/story/tirupati-laddu-ghee-adulteration-sit-flags-violations-irregularities-misconduct-514756-2026-02-05?utm_source=rssfeed","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.24725206,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["transfer of Anil Kumar Singhal"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"A special investigation team (SIT) probing the supply of ghee used for the preparation of laddu prasadam at Venkateswara Temple in Tirupati has reported serious irregularities, rule violations, and alleged deliberate...","search_text":"$5e"},{"article_id":"8779026e-22f2-4276-a7b9-695e4e569057","slug":"ghee-8779026e-22f2-4276-a7b9-695e4e569057","title":"Adulterated Ghee Was Supplied to Srisailam Temple Along With Tirumala Devasthanam: SIT","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2026-02-05","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/andhra-pradesh/adulterated-ghee-was-supplied-to-srisailam-temple-along-with-tirumala-devasthanam-sit-1935181","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.36104918,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["vegetable oils","chemicals"],"actions":[],"locations":["Srisailam, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"Adulterated Ghee Was Supplied to Srisailam Temple Along With Tirumala Devasthanam: SIT From May 2022 to March 2023, adulterated ghee was delivered to Srisailam by Rajesh Corporation, which procured ghee from Bhole Baba...","search_text":"$5f"},{"article_id":"f75dd4aa-d0bc-4078-857d-76a41f9df08f","slug":"ghee-f75dd4aa-d0bc-4078-857d-76a41f9df08f","title":"Pawan Kalyan Meets Naidu to Discuss Political and Tirumala Ghee Issue","source":"thehansindia.com","date":"2026-02-04","url":"https://www.thehansindia.com/andhra-pradesh/pawan-kalyan-meets-naidu-to-discuss-political-and-tirumala-ghee-issue-1045405","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.14546778,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["unknown"],"actions":["SIT formation","inquiry"],"locations":["Tirumala, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"Deputy Chief Minister Pawan Kalyan met with Chief Minister Chandrababu Naidu this morning to discuss various political developments and other pressing matters. The meeting, which began shortly after Pawan Kalyan arrived...","search_text":"$60"},{"article_id":"e6e7e00b-0ede-4741-8419-066a93e431cd","slug":"ghee-e6e7e00b-0ede-4741-8419-066a93e431cd","title":"Andhra to form panel to identify ‘real culprits’ of Tirumala ghee adulteration","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2026-02-04","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/india-news/andhra-to-form-panel-to-identify-real-culprits-of-tirumala-ghee-adulteration-101770148393113.html","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.15589569,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["soybean oil","chemicals"],"actions":["inquiry committee formation"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":13,"excerpt":"Andhra to form panel to identify ‘real culprits’ of Tirumala ghee adulteration Andhra Pradesh's cabinet will form an inquiry committee to investigate ghee adulteration for Tirumala laddu, ensuring fairness and...","search_text":"$61"},{"article_id":"534ab39c-32c3-46ea-a742-5095170a0003","slug":"ghee-534ab39c-32c3-46ea-a742-5095170a0003","title":"SIT finds ‘serious irregularities, deliberate misconduct’ in TTD adulterated ghee case","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2026-02-04","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/andhra-pradesh/sit-finds-serious-irregularities-deliberate-misconduct-in-ttd-adulterated-ghee-case/article70588560.ece","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.23545024,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","mislabeling","prohibited_additive"],"adulterants":["adulterated ghee"],"actions":["report submission"],"locations":["Tirumala, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"The Special Investigation Team (SIT) constituted by the Supreme Court has submitted a report to the Andhra Pradesh government on the alleged use of adulterated ghee in the preparation of the sacred Tirumala ‘Srivari...","search_text":"$62"},{"article_id":"29a173b3-4587-4257-9c93-2f0c483079c5","slug":"ghee-29a173b3-4587-4257-9c93-2f0c483079c5","title":"Andhra Pradesh Cabinet hands over TTD ghee adulteration case to Commission of Enquiry","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2026-02-03","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/andhra-pradesh/andhra-pradesh-cabinet-hands-over-ttd-ghee-adulteration-case-to-commission-of-enquiry/article70587730.ece","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.26053339,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["chemical substances"],"actions":["entrust to Commission of Enquiry"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"The Andhra Pradesh Cabinet has decided to entrust the alleged case of adulteration of ghee supplied to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams to a Commission of Enquiry to identify the actual masterminds behind the...","search_text":"$63"},{"article_id":"0ef4d3e4-844c-47ee-a430-8f171ec4c000","slug":"ghee-0ef4d3e4-844c-47ee-a430-8f171ec4c000","title":"Andhra Pradesh govt. vows strict action over adulterated ghee in TTD prasadam","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2026-02-03","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/andhra-pradesh/andhra-pradesh-govt-vows-strict-action-over-adulterated-ghee-in-ttd-prasadam/article70587850.ece","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.29036942,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["harmful substances"],"actions":["strict action","legal action","administrative action"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":8,"excerpt":"The State government has pledged decisive action following revelations that adulterated ghee was used in Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams prasadam, describing the episode as a grave breach of public trust and temple...","search_text":"$64"},{"article_id":"d405b9b8-3fd3-4230-a3d3-ccdd34abd185","slug":"ghee-d405b9b8-3fd3-4230-a3d3-ccdd34abd185","title":"Andhra govt transfers TTD official after charge sheet in ghee case","source":"siasat.com","date":"2026-02-01","url":"https://www.siasat.com/andhra-govt-transfers-ttd-official-after-charge-sheet-in-ghee-case-3335023/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.9,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.16751746,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal fats"],"actions":["charge sheet filed","official transferred"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Amaravati: A week after the SIT filed its charge sheet in a Tirupati court over adulterated ghee allegations during the previous YSRCP regime, TTD Executive Officer Anil Kumar Singhal was transferred. The 1993 batch IAS...","search_text":"$65"},{"article_id":"f25f2d19-18b4-4e7e-ad7b-8f30a193b3d6","slug":"ghee-f25f2d19-18b4-4e7e-ad7b-8f30a193b3d6","title":"'Made from synthetic material': CBI chargesheet rules out mixing of animal fats in Tirupati laddu ghee | Hyderabad News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-01-31","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/hyderabad/made-from-synthetic-material-cbi-chargesheet-rules-out-mixing-of-animal-fats-in-tirupati-laddu-ghee/articleshow/127813662.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["synthetic ghee","beta sitosterol"],"actions":["chargesheet_filed"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":12,"excerpt":"HYDERABAD: The special investigation team of the CBI, in its chargesheet filed in Nellore ACB court, has not made any reference to the ghee supplied to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) as being adulterated with...","search_text":"$66"},{"article_id":"f1ba13f7-7414-47ce-9df3-a6aa0902c1b9","slug":"ghee-f1ba13f7-7414-47ce-9df3-a6aa0902c1b9","title":"TTD chief rejects YSRCP’s ‘clean chit’ claim in laddu ghee scam","source":"siasat.com","date":"2026-01-31","url":"https://www.siasat.com/ttd-chief-rejects-ysrcps-clean-chit-claim-in-laddu-ghee-scam-3334108/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.27903232,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":2,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["Tests conducted by the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) confirmed the presence of animal fat in the ghee supplied during the YSRCP tenure","micro-DNA testing is essential to establish the complete truth in the laddu ghee adulteration case"],"locations":["India, Tirumala temple"],"accepted_triplet_count":9,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":10,"excerpt":"Tirupati: In a scathing attack on the YSRCP, TTD Chairman B R Naidu on Friday alleged that a ‘massive ghee adulteration scam’ involving harmful chemicals had taken place during the YS Jagan Mohan Reddy-led government in...","search_text":"$67"},{"article_id":"e1955bc5-123d-4ca0-b875-2d75b1f718f1","slug":"ghee-e1955bc5-123d-4ca0-b875-2d75b1f718f1","title":"TTD chief says ‘real culprits’ ignored in SIT charge sheet on ghee row","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2026-01-31","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/india-news/ttd-chief-says-real-culprits-ignored-in-sit-charge-sheet-on-ghee-row-101769799977686.html","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.92,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.20207923,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal fat","chemicals","life-threatening chemicals"],"actions":["charge sheet"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":6,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"TTD chief says ‘real culprits’ ignored in SIT charge sheet on ghee row TTD chairman BR Naidu criticized the CBI's SIT for not identifying key players in the ₹250 crore ghee adulteration scandal involving Tirupati...","search_text":"$68"},{"article_id":"d5ff3294-0ecd-48eb-b9dd-a2c0282a055a","slug":"ghee-d5ff3294-0ecd-48eb-b9dd-a2c0282a055a","title":"YSRC Suppressed Ghee Adulteration Report, Now Politicising It: Kesav","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2026-01-31","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/andhra-pradesh/ysrc-suppressed-ghee-adulteration-report-now-politicising-it-kesav-1934039","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.23097422,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["vegetable fat","animal fat"],"actions":["charge sheet filed"],"locations":["Vijayawada, Krishna, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":5,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Addressing the media here, Kesav said the Central Food Technological Research Institute (CFTRI) had confirmed adulteration in its 2022 report, but the then YSRC government failed to act and buried the findings....","search_text":"$69"},{"article_id":"bdc8358e-29a2-4efa-a99e-6023a27df35b","slug":"ghee-bdc8358e-29a2-4efa-a99e-6023a27df35b","title":"CBI chargesheet rules out animal fats in Tirupati laddu ghee | Hyderabad News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-01-31","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/hyderabad/cbi-chargesheet-rules-out-animal-fats-in-tirupati-laddu-ghee/articleshow/127809453.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.12175215,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["synthetic ghee","vegetable oils","beta sitosterol"],"actions":["chargesheet filed"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":8,"excerpt":"Tirupati: The special investigation team of the CBI, in its chargesheet filed in Nellore ACB court, has not made any reference to the ghee supplied to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) as being adulterated with...","search_text":"$6a"},{"article_id":"b293dea5-f7e1-4889-a56d-f823569cdff4","slug":"ghee-b293dea5-f7e1-4889-a56d-f823569cdff4","title":"AP Debunks YSRCP's Claims that Ghee Supplied to TTD Not Adulterated with Animal Fat","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2026-01-31","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/andhra-pradesh/ap-debunks-ysrcps-claims-that-ghee-supplied-to-ttd-not-adulterated-with-animal-fat-1933972","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.18870033,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["palmolein oil"],"actions":["chargesheet filed"],"locations":["Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"Hyderabad: Andhra Pradesh Finance Minister Payyavula Keshav on Saturday said that the ghee samples from TTD sent to the NDDB clearly stated that there was a possibility of the presence of animal fats, and that Chief...","search_text":"$6b"},{"article_id":"8eb102f2-a097-496b-8975-3d2cd6e31a8d","slug":"ghee-8eb102f2-a097-496b-8975-3d2cd6e31a8d","title":"SIT chargesheet confirms adulteration of ghee, says TTD chief","source":"thehansindia.com","date":"2026-01-31","url":"https://www.thehansindia.com/andhra-pradesh/sit-chargesheet-confirms-adulteration-of-ghee-says-ttd-chief-1044034","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.21248473,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":3,"claim_statuses":["recall_triggered"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["tests conducted by the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) found the presence of animal fat in the ghee","ghee was prepared without using milk and was adulterated with animal fat","SIT chargesheet clearly mentioned the mixing of animal fat in the ghee"],"locations":["India, Tirumala"],"accepted_triplet_count":7,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Tirupati: The NDA leaders on Friday continued to attack the opposition YSRCP over the alleged adulteration of ghee used in the preparation of the sacred Srivari laddu prasadam at Tirumala. Senior leaders, including TTD...","search_text":"$6c"},{"article_id":"4cd73621-691c-4866-91c1-0b99d0d1a89a","slug":"ghee-4cd73621-691c-4866-91c1-0b99d0d1a89a","title":"Lokesh alleges YSRCP sat on ghee report | Vijayawada News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-01-31","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/vijayawada/lokesh-alleges-ysrcp-sat-on-ghee-report/articleshow/127807673.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.23041491,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal fat","vegetable oil"],"actions":[],"locations":["Kakinada, Krishna, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Kakinada: HRD ministerNara Lokesh has urged the TDP cadres to stay alert to the \"false campaign\" allegedly being carried out by opposition parties on the Tirupati laddu issue. He recalled that the TDP was earlier blamed...","search_text":"$6d"},{"article_id":"1e6b9f5b-a065-4242-ae58-1f105455955f","slug":"ghee-1e6b9f5b-a065-4242-ae58-1f105455955f","title":"Andhra Minister debunks YSRCP's claims that ghee supplied to TTD not adulterated with animal fat","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-01-31","url":"https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/politics-and-nation/andhra-minister-debunks-ysrcps-claims-that-ghee-supplied-to-ttd-not-adulterated-with-animal-fat/articleshow/127817116.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["palmolein oil"],"actions":["chargesheet_filing"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":8,"excerpt":"Addressing a press conference, he alleged that the previous YSRCP government treated the procurement of ghee for the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) laddu as a commercial transaction, without having faith in Sri...","search_text":"$6e"},{"article_id":"0af3703f-23ec-4f8f-a1b6-45b4adb68b12","slug":"ghee-0af3703f-23ec-4f8f-a1b6-45b4adb68b12","title":"SIT Chargesheet in Laddu Ghee Case Sparks Political Sparring in Tirupati","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2026-01-31","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/andhra-pradesh/sit-chargesheet-in-laddu-ghee-case-sparks-political-sparring-in-tirupati-1933889","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.16398985,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["synthetic material"],"actions":["chargesheet"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"YSRC claims no proof of animal fat use; NDA says report confirms adulteration Tirupati: The Special Investigation Team (SIT) charge sheet in the Tirumala laddu ghee adulteration case triggered a political confrontation...","search_text":"$6f"},{"article_id":"dc0f107c-d6af-40f2-b8fd-d6a8264071a5","slug":"ghee-dc0f107c-d6af-40f2-b8fd-d6a8264071a5","title":"No Beef Fat In Tirupati Ghee, CBI Finds Synthetic Adulteration But No Animal Fat","source":"thequint.com","date":"2026-01-30","url":"https://www.thequint.com/news/breaking-news/cbi-finds-no-animal-fat-tirupati-ghee","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.3584392,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["beta carotene","synthetic oils"],"actions":["chargesheet"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":17,"excerpt":"The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) has concluded that the ghee used in the preparation of Tirupati laddu prasadam between 2019 and 2024 did not contain any animal fat. However, the investigation found that the...","search_text":"$70"},{"article_id":"b4b614f7-a43d-4e57-9766-25f7fef90d68","slug":"ghee-b4b614f7-a43d-4e57-9766-25f7fef90d68","title":"Ghee adulteration issue: TTD Chairman seeks deeper SIT probe into money trail","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2026-01-30","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/andhra-pradesh/ghee-adulteration-issue-ttd-chairman-seeks-deeper-sit-probe-into-money-trail/article70570737.ece","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.22293077,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["synthetic substance","lethal chemicals"],"actions":["charge sheet filed"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"T Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams Trust Board Chairman B. R. Naidu has said that the final charge sheet filed in court by the Special Investigation Team led by the Central Bureau of Investigation has clearly indicted the...","search_text":"$71"},{"article_id":"95044e07-ad37-43f6-95b0-cebe1e9f8ce0","slug":"ghee-95044e07-ad37-43f6-95b0-cebe1e9f8ce0","title":"43,421 litres of spurious ghee seized from warehouse in city | Jaipur News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-01-30","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/jaipur/43421-litres-of-spurious-ghee-seized-from-warehouse-in-city/articleshow/127784638.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","unsafe_food"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","recall","licence_cancellation_proceedings"],"locations":["Jaipur, Rajasthan, India"],"primary_state":"Rajasthan","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"Jaipur: As many as 43,421 litres of ghee suspected to be adulterated was seized in Jaipur Thursday from three warehouses linked to Messrs Girdhar Milk Food Product and another unit operating at the same premises by the...","search_text":"$72"},{"article_id":"815dcb75-691c-4066-a898-b7ed46fdbdf2","slug":"ghee-815dcb75-691c-4066-a898-b7ed46fdbdf2","title":"Political row over final charge sheet which says Tirumala ghee had no animal fat","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2026-01-30","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/india-news/political-row-over-final-charge-sheet-which-says-tirumala-ghee-had-no-animal-fat-101769715230981.html","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.22901591,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["synthetic oils","chemicals","beta carotene"],"actions":["charge_sheet_filed","arrests_made"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":13,"excerpt":"Political row over final charge sheet which says Tirumala ghee had no animal fat The CBI-led SIT's charge sheet on adulterated ghee for Tirumala laddus reveals a political controversy, exonerating the YSRCP amid...","search_text":"$73"},{"article_id":"70b9c7ef-3983-40dd-b904-5607537ff37f","slug":"ghee-70b9c7ef-3983-40dd-b904-5607537ff37f","title":"Adulterated ghee supplied to TTD: MLA","source":"thehansindia.com","date":"2026-01-30","url":"https://www.thehansindia.com/andhra-pradesh/adulterated-ghee-supplied-to-ttd-mla-1043643","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.28333156,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["adulterated ghee"],"actions":[],"locations":["Guntur, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Guntur: Guntur West MLA Galla Madhavi has challenged YSRCP chief YS Jagan Mohan Reddy to come to the Assembly to discuss the issue of adulterated ghee. Speaking at a press meet held at the TDP office here on Thursday,...","search_text":"$74"},{"article_id":"5fa4530c-d60b-48c1-b6b2-371abff6d77a","slug":"ghee-5fa4530c-d60b-48c1-b6b2-371abff6d77a","title":"TTD Chairman Refutes YSRC’s Claim Of Clean Chit In Laddu Ghee Case","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2026-01-30","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/andhra-pradesh/ttd-chairman-refutes-ysrcs-claim-of-clean-chit-in-laddu-ghee-case-1933848","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.22227136,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":["chemicals","animal fat"],"actions":["charge sheet filed","investigation ongoing"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"The TTD chairman alleged that procurement rules and tender conditions had been deliberately altered during the YSRC regime to allow ghee supply from dairies that lacked the required production capacity and quality...","search_text":"$75"},{"article_id":"3624ed70-d464-4caa-9b4e-4dfc2ed435dc","slug":"ghee-3624ed70-d464-4caa-9b4e-4dfc2ed435dc","title":"Rajasthan govt raids adulterated ghee supply chain; 43,000 litres seized","source":"assamtribune.com","date":"2026-01-30","url":"https://assamtribune.com/health-and-fitness/rajasthan-govt-raids-adulterated-ghee-supply-chain-43000-litres-seized-1606034","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.85343619,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["unsafe_food","adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","market withdrawal","license cancellation proceedings"],"locations":["Jaipur, Pratapgarh, Rajasthan, India"],"primary_state":"Rajasthan","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":8,"excerpt":"Jaipur, Jan 30: In a statewide drive against food adulteration being carried out in Rajasthan, the state's Food Safety Department took major action under the \"Pure Food – War on Adulteration\" initiative and seized more...","search_text":"$76"},{"article_id":"ea27969f-7a0b-4e5c-9893-7763d5fdbfbf","slug":"ghee-ea27969f-7a0b-4e5c-9893-7763d5fdbfbf","title":"TD Seeks Jagan’s Response on Alleged Adulteration of Tirumala Laddu Ghee","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2026-01-29","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/andhra-pradesh/td-seeks-jagans-response-on-alleged-adulteration-of-tirumala-laddu-ghee-1933610","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.9,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.25893504,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["Tirumala Srivari laddu"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["adulterated ghee"],"actions":["charge sheet"],"locations":["Tirupati, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Bojjala Sudheer Reddy cites SIT probe, alleges adulteration during YSRC rule Tirupati: Sri Kalahasti MLA Bojjala Venkata Sudheer Reddy on Thursday demanded that former Chief Minister Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy respond to...","search_text":"$77"},{"article_id":"dd99547d-81d1-4764-ba78-52a1cddf906d","slug":"ghee-dd99547d-81d1-4764-ba78-52a1cddf906d","title":"TTD ghee adulteration case dominates Cabinet meet","source":"thehansindia.com","date":"2026-01-29","url":"https://www.thehansindia.com/andhra-pradesh/ttd-ghee-adulteration-case-dominates-cabinet-meet-1043278","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.15284991,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["chemicals"],"actions":["chargesheet filed"],"locations":["Vijayawada, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Vijayawada: The Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) adulterated ghee case figured prominently in the Andhra Pradesh Cabinet meeting on Wednesday, with Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu told ministers to wait until the...","search_text":"$78"},{"article_id":"33326887-4ed0-4562-a0ac-b889d6ad53a9","slug":"ghee-33326887-4ed0-4562-a0ac-b889d6ad53a9","title":"‘Artificial Ghee Supplied...’: Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams Laddu Ghee Found Adulterated With Palm Oil, SIT Chargesheet Names 36 Accused, Exposes Hawala Link","source":"newsx.com","date":"2026-01-29","url":"https://www.newsx.com/india/artificial-ghee-supplied-tirumala-tirupati-devasthanams-laddu-ghee-found-adulterated-with-palm-oil-sit-chargesheet-names-36-accused-exposes-hawala-link-tirupati-laddu-scam-155783/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.43514516,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["palm oil","vegetable oils"],"actions":["chargesheet filed"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":14,"excerpt":"Tirupati laddu adulteration case: The Special Investigation Team (SIT) has filed its final chargesheet in the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) laddu ghee adulteration case, revealing that the ghee used in the sacred...","search_text":"$79"},{"article_id":"e9029bad-f0af-4178-8545-61b8bf20d98f","slug":"ghee-e9029bad-f0af-4178-8545-61b8bf20d98f","title":"TTD Ghee Adulteration Row Sparks Political Storm; Cabinet Seeks SIT Report","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2026-01-28","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/andhra-pradesh/ttd-ghee-adulteration-row-sparks-political-storm-cabinet-seeks-sit-report-1933382","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.9,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.21560687,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["chemicals"],"actions":["charge-sheet filed"],"locations":["Vijayawada, Krishna, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"Chief Minister N. Chandrababu Naidu reiterated that the government would respond only after the SIT report is officially made public, and urged ministers to remain vigilant. Vijayawada: The Andhra Pradesh Cabinet on...","search_text":"$7a"},{"article_id":"2013c452-d1c8-41a0-abea-92e26d231790","slug":"ghee-2013c452-d1c8-41a0-abea-92e26d231790","title":"APCC seeks recovery of ₹250 crore from former TTD officials in ghee adulteration case","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2026-01-25","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/andhra-pradesh/apcc-seeks-recovery-of-250-crore-from-former-ttd-officials-in-ghee-adulteration-case/article70550244.ece","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.54368113,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["palm oil","chemicals"],"actions":[],"locations":["Tirumala, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":5,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Andhra Pradesh Congress Committee vice-president Kolanukonda Shivaji on Sunday demanded that the money allegedly misappropriated from the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams during the YSRCP government be recovered from...","search_text":"$7b"},{"article_id":"030df41e-ccfc-4023-a026-89cc92bf3253","slug":"ghee-030df41e-ccfc-4023-a026-89cc92bf3253","title":"Tirupati laddu ghee case: CBI SIT names 36 accused, including TTD officials","source":"thehindubusinessline.com","date":"2026-01-25","url":"https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/news/tirupati-laddu-ghee-case-cbi-sit-names-36-accused-including-ttd-officials/article70548628.ece","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.44324599,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":2,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["adulterated ghee was made by mixing ingredients such as palm oil, palm kernel oil and palmolein.","chemicals such as beta carotene, acetic acid ester, ghee flavour and other adulterants were used to adjust lab test values and maintain aroma in the adulterated ghee"],"locations":["India, Tirupati"],"accepted_triplet_count":5,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"A CBI special investigation team probing the Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration case has named 36 people, including nine TTD officials and five dairy experts, as accused in the matter. As per the findings of the probe,...","search_text":"$7c"},{"article_id":"cf35dad3-c846-4c5e-91db-577efd256f78","slug":"ghee-cf35dad3-c846-4c5e-91db-577efd256f78","title":"TTD laddu ghee adulteration case: CBI-SIT files final chargesheet, names 36 accused | Amaravati News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2026-01-24","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/amaravati/ttd-laddu-ghee-adulteration-case-cbi-sit-files-chargesheet-names-36-accused/articleshow/127362854.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.3852166,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["synthetic fake ghee"],"actions":["chargesheet filed"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":8,"excerpt":"TIRUPATI: The CBI-led SIT concluded its probe into the TTD laddu ghee adulteration case, and the final chargesheet was filed before the ACB court in Nellore on Friday. In its final chargesheet, the SIT concluded that...","search_text":"$7d"},{"article_id":"c6e6e3f3-bc85-48dc-ad18-bb08d31d7308","slug":"ghee-c6e6e3f3-bc85-48dc-ad18-bb08d31d7308","title":"TTD laddu row: Uttarakhand-based dairy, 24 others named in final chargesheet of CBI-led SIT | Today News","source":"livemint.com","date":"2026-01-24","url":"https://www.livemint.com/news/india/ttd-laddu-row-uttarakhand-based-dairy-24-others-named-in-final-chargesheet-of-cbi-led-sit-adulterated-ghee-11769229345626.html","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.21557441,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee","laddu prasadam"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["synthetic ghee"],"actions":["chargesheet"],"locations":["Tirumala, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"The probe into the sensational Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) laddu row, or the ghee adulteration case, that rocked the administration last year, has come to a conclusion after 15 long months. According to The...","search_text":"$7e"},{"article_id":"2679a7a3-abde-4979-ac6e-5cf24113e0db","slug":"ghee-2679a7a3-abde-4979-ac6e-5cf24113e0db","title":"Tirumala Ghee Adulteration Case: SIT completes probe, files final chargesheet","source":"thehansindia.com","date":"2026-01-24","url":"https://www.thehansindia.com/andhra-pradesh/tirumala-ghee-adulteration-case-sit-completes-probe-files-final-chargesheet-1041872","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"provisional","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.25129377,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["investigation"],"locations":["Uttarakhand, India"],"primary_state":"Uttarakhand","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":14,"excerpt":"Tirupati: After an investigation spanning more than a year and stretching across a dozen states, the Special Investigation Team (SIT) submitted its final charge sheet in the Nellore ACB Court on Friday in the case...","search_text":"$7f"},{"article_id":"9f454843-a34c-4619-a576-493f835993b4","slug":"ghee-9f454843-a34c-4619-a576-493f835993b4","title":"CBI-led SIT files final charge-sheet in TTD ghee adulteration case","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2026-01-23","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/andhra-pradesh/cbi-led-sit-files-final-charge-sheet-in-ttd-ghee-adulteration-case/article70543413.ece","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.35268029,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["synthetic ghee"],"actions":["charge-sheet filing"],"locations":["Tirumala, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"The Special Investigation Team (SIT) formed under the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) has concluded its probe into the sensational ghee adulteration case that rocked the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD)...","search_text":"$80"},{"article_id":"484a6113-0a95-4624-8291-c00710260e4d","slug":"ghee-484a6113-0a95-4624-8291-c00710260e4d","title":"SIT files charge sheet in Tirumala ghee case","source":"thehansindia.com","date":"2026-01-23","url":"https://www.thehansindia.com/andhra-pradesh/sit-files-charge-sheet-in-tirumala-ghee-case-1041805","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.19924166,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["charge sheet filing"],"locations":["India, Tirumala"],"accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"The Special Investigation Team (SIT) has concluded its probe into the adulterated ghee supplied for the preparation of Tirumala Srivari laddus and has filed a charge sheet before the Nellore ACB court. The...","search_text":"$81"},{"article_id":"53f8ec9a-900f-481f-bfb5-a6ca452416ed","slug":"ghee-53f8ec9a-900f-481f-bfb5-a6ca452416ed","title":"Tirumala laddu ghee case enters final stage!","source":"thehansindia.com","date":"2026-01-13","url":"https://www.thehansindia.com/andhra-pradesh/tirumala-laddu-ghee-case-enters-final-stage-1038979","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.15440606,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee","laddu"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["substandard ghee"],"actions":["investigation","rejection of anticipatory bail"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Tirupati: After more than a year of investigation into the alleged mixing of substandard ghee in the famed Tirumala laddu prasadam, the probe is nearing its conclusion, with officials preparing to take the next major...","search_text":"$82"},{"article_id":"1de65c17-36dd-4ba6-ada6-bcd98b556aad","slug":"ghee-1de65c17-36dd-4ba6-ada6-bcd98b556aad","title":"SIT to File Charge Sheet in Laddu Ghee Case Soon","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2026-01-12","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/andhra-pradesh/sit-to-file-charge-sheet-in-laddu-ghee-case-soon-1930092","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"provisional","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.1522974,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["filing of charge sheet"],"locations":["India, Tirupati"],"accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"CBI joint director S Veeresh Prabhu visited the SIT office in Tirupati last week and held a meeting with SIT officers. Tirupati: The CBI’s Special Investigation Team probing the alleged ghee adulteration in the Tirumala...","search_text":"$83"},{"article_id":"62bc0e3c-1d90-4688-bc1b-e00f620c5c8c","slug":"ghee-62bc0e3c-1d90-4688-bc1b-e00f620c5c8c","title":"Amul Flags Illegal US Imports of Indian Cow Ghee Mislabelled as Vegetable Oil to Evade Duty","source":"thelogicalindian.com","date":"2026-01-05","url":"http://redirect.whalebone.io/passthrough?data=eyJNZXRob2QiOiJHRVQiLCJTY2hlbWUiOiJodHRwcyIsIkhvc3QiOiJ0aGVsb2dpY2FsaW5kaWFuLmNvbSIsIlBvcnQiOiI0NDMiLCJQb3N0RGF0YSI6IiIsIlBhdGgiOiIvYW11bC1mbGFncy1pbGxlZ2FsLXVzLWltcG9ydHMtb2YtaW5kaWFuLWNvdy1naGVlLW1pc2xhYmVsbGVkLWFzLXZlZ2V0YWJsZS1vaWwtdG8tZXZhZGUtZHV0eS8iLCJRdWVyeSI6Int9IiwiU2lua2hvbGVJRCI6MjAwMDE3MiwiTnVtYmVyT2ZSZWRpcmVjdHMiOjB9","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.48316,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","mislabeling"],"adulterants":["mislabelled as vegetable oil"],"actions":[],"locations":["United States"],"accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":0,"excerpt":"Attention! You have tried to access a site at https://thelogicalindian.com:443/amul-flags-illegal-us-imports-of-indian-cow-ghee-mislabelled-as-vegetable-oil-to-evade-duty/ which Tripleplay considers to be harmful. If...","search_text":"Amul Flags Illegal US Imports of Indian Cow Ghee Mislabelled as Vegetable Oil to Evade Duty thelogicalindian.com Attention!\n        You have tried to access a site at https://thelogicalindian.com:443/amul-flags-illegal-us-imports-of-indian-cow-ghee-mislabelled-as-vegetable-oil-to-evade-duty/ which Tripleplay considers to be harmful.\n       \n  \n      \n        \n        \n          If you believe this to be an error, please contact your administrator.\n          customercare@tripleplay.in\n          \n        \n       \n  \n      \n        Leave page\n        Proceed anyway\n        \n          We are working on the redirection to the site. This operation could take a while. ghee adulteration mislabeling mislabelled as vegetable oil alleged United States cow ghee fflo:hasAdulterationMethod mislabelled as vegetable oil Indian Cow Ghee Mislabelled as Vegetable Oil Illegal US Imports of Indian Cow Ghee prov:wasAttributedTo Amul Amul Flags Illegal US Imports of Indian Cow Ghee"},{"article_id":"oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9","slug":"oil-fd16f7be050ea2b9","title":"The Vitamin D trap: How âfortifiedâ oil poisoned Punjab homes","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-12-29","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/chandigarh/the-vitamin-d-trap-how-fortified-oil-poisoned-punjab-homes/articleshow/126219580.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8302,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["lab_confirmed"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard","mislabeling"],"adulterants":["Vitamin D"],"actions":["court proceedings","public advisories","raids"],"locations":["Rajpura, Patiala, Punjab, India"],"primary_state":"Punjab","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":11,"excerpt":"Chandigarh: A medical investigation spanning the states of Punjab and Kolkata finally uncovered the source of a toxic \"fortified\" oil that left several residents of Punjab in critical condition. Months after TOI...","search_text":"$84"},{"article_id":"e500f58c-3afd-4143-b4d2-f60500bf9023","slug":"ghee-e500f58c-3afd-4143-b4d2-f60500bf9023","title":"Fake ghee making unit busted in Jaipur, 4 held | Jaipur News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-12-22","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/jaipur/fake-ghee-making-unit-busted-in-jaipur-4-held/articleshow/126109498.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["recall_triggered"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["India, Jaipur"],"accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":9,"excerpt":"Jaipur: City police Sunday busted a large-scale fake ghee manufacturing unit operating from Sarna Dungar and seized around 7,500 litre of spurious ghee, arresting four persons involved in the racket. The counterfeit...","search_text":"$85"},{"article_id":"73e97a89-5b5f-4104-bc6a-50b8f564040a","slug":"ghee-73e97a89-5b5f-4104-bc6a-50b8f564040a","title":"SIT set to file chargesheet in ghee adulteration case in Andhra","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2025-12-16","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/andhra-pradesh/2025/Dec/16/sit-set-to-file-chargesheet-in-ghee-adulteration-case-in-andhra","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.24309945,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["adulterated ghee"],"actions":["chargesheet filing"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"TIRUPATI: The Supreme Court-appointed CBI-led joint Special Investigation Team (SIT) has intensified efforts to finalise the chargesheet in the Tirumala Srivari laddu ghee adulteration case and is likely to file it...","search_text":"$86"},{"article_id":"3911de79-cbfd-4eaa-9311-207b452faa93","slug":"ghee-3911de79-cbfd-4eaa-9311-207b452faa93","title":"Laddu ghee case: HC dismisses bail plea of former TTD chairmanâ_x0080__x0099_s PA | Vijayawada News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-12-15","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/vijayawada/laddu-ghee-case-hc-dismisses-bail-plea-of-former-ttd-chairmans-pa/articleshow/125987137.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.2659808,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["bail plea dismissed"],"locations":["Vijayawada, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":0,"excerpt":"Vijayawada: AP high court on Monday dismissed the bail petition filed by K Chinnappanna, personal assistant to former TTD chairman Y V Subba Reddy, in the alleged laddu ghee adulteration case. Chinnappanna is one of the...","search_text":"$87"},{"article_id":"05937ca4-de64-422f-ba56-878f6152027c","slug":"ghee-05937ca4-de64-422f-ba56-878f6152027c","title":"Indore News: 3 Dairy Licences Suspended In Ghee Adulteration Crackdown","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2025-12-14","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/indore/indore-news-3-dairy-licences-suspended-in-ghee-adulteration-crackdown","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["suspension of three dairy licences"],"locations":["Indore (, Madhya Pradesh, India, Indore (Madhya Pradesh)"],"primary_state":"Madhya Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Indore (Madhya Pradesh): In a decisive move against food adulteration, district administration and Food and Drug Administration (FDA) suspended three dairy licences after detecting largescale irregularities in ghee...","search_text":"$88"},{"article_id":"bc813ec4-3453-4fe2-a5d0-884fdb51bfc7","slug":"ghee-bc813ec4-3453-4fe2-a5d0-884fdb51bfc7","title":"TTD laddu ghee scam: Order on Chinnappa bail slated for December 16","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2025-12-13","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/andhra-pradesh/2025/Dec/13/ttd-laddu-ghee-scam-order-on-chinnappa-bail-slated-for-december-16","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.38374788,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["fake ghee"],"actions":["bail petition"],"locations":["Vijayawada, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"VIJAYAWADA: The Andhra Pradesh High Court on Friday reserved judgment on the bail petition filed by Chinnappa, former PA to ex-TTD Chairman Subba Reddy, in the alleged fake ghee supply scam linked to the preparation of...","search_text":"$89"},{"article_id":"b8eebc63-ef4e-4144-9327-420f594806c6","slug":"ghee-b8eebc63-ef4e-4144-9327-420f594806c6","title":"Man held for selling adulterated ghee in Secunderabad","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2025-12-13","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/telangana/man-held-for-selling-adulterated-ghee-in-secunderabad/article70392487.ece","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.9639124,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["India, Secunderabad"],"accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":8,"excerpt":"Acting on credible information, the Commissioner’s Task Force (North Zone), along with Market police, apprehended a man for allegedly manufacturing and selling adulterated ghee in the Second Bazar area of Secunderabad...","search_text":"$8a"},{"article_id":"84ea460e-bfc2-4977-aebb-32594a90693b","slug":"ghee-84ea460e-bfc2-4977-aebb-32594a90693b","title":"'Mindset Shaped By Appeasement Politics...': AP Deputy CM Pawan Kalyan Hits Out At TN CM Stalin On Tirupati Laddoo-Ghee Case","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2025-12-11","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/india/mindset-shaped-by-appeasement-politics-ap-deputy-cm-pawan-kalyan-hits-out-at-tn-cm-stalin-on-tirupati-laddoo-ghee-case","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.15362254,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["unknown"],"actions":["arrest","custody","legal action"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Amravati: Andhra Pradesh Deputy Chief Minister Pawan Kalyan criticised Tamil Nadu Chief Minister MK Stalin over his remarks on the Tirumala adulterated laddoo-ghee scam, asserting that protections provided to minority...","search_text":"$8b"},{"article_id":"4d6ab7d0-4e16-4d1b-aa49-7f453c9352b6","slug":"ghee-4d6ab7d0-4e16-4d1b-aa49-7f453c9352b6","title":"Pawan Kalyan criticises MK Stalin as SIT makes new arrests in Tirumala laddu-ghee scam","source":"thehindubusinessline.com","date":"2025-12-11","url":"https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/news/pawan-kalyan-hits-out-at-mk-stalin-over-tirumala-laddu-ghee-scam-comments/article70383212.ece","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.16003916,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["arrest","custody"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":9,"excerpt":"Andhra Pradesh Deputy Chief Minister Pawan Kalyan criticised Tamil Nadu Chief Minister MK Stalin over his remarks on the Tirumala adulterated laddoo-ghee scam, asserting that protections provided to minority communities...","search_text":"$8c"},{"article_id":"eb7f5240-b11f-4c58-9681-91c05d2c3f50","slug":"ghee-eb7f5240-b11f-4c58-9681-91c05d2c3f50","title":"Tirumala Shocker: Rs 54 Crore Silk Dupatta Scam Uncovered After Fake Ghee Row and Donation Box Theft","source":"newsx.com","date":"2025-12-10","url":"https://www.newsx.com/regionals/tirumala-shocker-rs-54-crore-silk-dupatta-scam-uncovered-after-fake-ghee-row-and-donation-box-theft-125182/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.26846311,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["adulterated ghee"],"actions":["investigation"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"The vigilance officials have unearthed a new scam at Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam, this time finding an inconsistency in acquiring the silk dupattas for a decade-long period. The dupattas were believed to be pure...","search_text":"$8d"},{"article_id":"d3bd5582-331f-4b89-96d8-d988dabaecd2","slug":"ghee-d3bd5582-331f-4b89-96d8-d988dabaecd2","title":"SIT grills two accused in ghee case in  Tirumala laddu ghee adulteration case","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2025-12-10","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/andhra-pradesh/2025/Dec/10/sit-grills-two-accused-in-ghee-case-in-tirumala-laddu-ghee-adulteration-case","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.26785331,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["interrogation"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"TIRUPATI: The SC-appointed CBI-led Special Investigation Team (SIT) intensified its probe into the Tirumala laddu ghee adulteration case on Tuesday by simultaneously interrogating two key accused for the first time. The...","search_text":"$8e"},{"article_id":"1a87f314-ec7e-4407-96f2-0995e8d26fc0","slug":"ghee-1a87f314-ec7e-4407-96f2-0995e8d26fc0","title":"Tirumala now hit by  ₹54 crore silk shawl scam after adulterated ghee and donation rows","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2025-12-10","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/india-news/tirumala-now-hit-by-rs-54-crore-silk-shawl-scam-after-adulterated-ghee-and-donation-rows-101765378656376.html","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.26796973,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal fat"],"actions":["police complaint filed"],"locations":["Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Tirumala now hit by ₹54 crore silk shawl scam after adulterated ghee and donation rows TTD has sought an Anti-Corruption Bureau (ACB) probe into a major shawl procurement scandal. A fresh scam has hit the Tirupati...","search_text":"$8f"},{"article_id":"a45c3495-d077-4241-b1d7-72fa109d0e6b","slug":"ghee-a45c3495-d077-4241-b1d7-72fa109d0e6b","title":"CBI-led SIT secures custody of two key accused in Laddu ghee adulteration case","source":"thehansindia.com","date":"2025-12-09","url":"https://www.thehansindia.com/andhra-pradesh/cbi-led-sit-secures-custody-of-two-key-accused-in-laddu-ghee-adulteration-case-1029646","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.45189029,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["acetic acid ester"],"actions":["custodial questioning","arrest"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":10,"excerpt":"Tirupati: The probe into the Tirumala adulterated ghee scandal gained momentum on Monday after Nellore ACB Court handed over two key accused to the CBI Special Investigation Team (SIT) for custodial questioning. The...","search_text":"$90"},{"article_id":"adfa4015-b34e-4488-99e4-b20b4dc10324","slug":"ghee-adfa4015-b34e-4488-99e4-b20b4dc10324","title":"SIT Gets 4-Day Custody Of 2 Accused In Tirumala Ghee Scam","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2025-12-08","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/andhra-pradesh/sit-gets-4-day-custody-of-2-accused-in-tirumala-ghee-scam-1922534","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.50984766,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["beta sitosterol","vegetable oil"],"actions":["police custody","arrest"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":9,"excerpt":"The court granted more time to the CBI-led special investigation team to question the two in connection with the irregularities/corruption in the ghee procurement at TTD: Reports TIRUPATI: Two accused in the Tirumala...","search_text":"$91"},{"article_id":"e27aa94c-fa47-4a58-bc17-1e5d3387b739","slug":"ghee-e27aa94c-fa47-4a58-bc17-1e5d3387b739","title":"1500 kg of spurious ghee seized in factory raid in Delhi","source":"indianexpress.com","date":"2025-12-05","url":"https://indianexpress.com/article/cities/delhi/1500-kg-of-spurious-ghee-seized-in-factory-raid-in-delhi-10403104/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","raid"],"locations":["Delhi, Outer North Delhi, India"],"primary_state":"Delhi","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"NTC ERTH Vedik Desi Ghee, Gau Amrit, NAMDEV Desi Ghee, NTC Saras Gold and NS Nadan Saras–these are among the labels under which over 1500 litres of spurious ghee was being manufactured at a factory in Outer North...","search_text":"$92"},{"article_id":"229a7f40-f956-476e-8c84-3fd9ed3d6c29","slug":"ghee-229a7f40-f956-476e-8c84-3fd9ed3d6c29","title":"1,500 kg spurious ghee seized during  raid in Delhi's Alipur","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2025-12-05","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/cities/delhi/2025/Dec/05/1500-kg-spurious-ghee-seized-during-raid-in-delhis-alipur","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure of samples for laboratory examination","raid","FIR registered"],"locations":["New Delhi, Alipur, Delhi, India"],"primary_state":"Delhi","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"NEW DELHI: large-scale spurious ‘desi ghee’ manufacturing unit was busted in the Alipur area, with police seizing 1,500 kg of clarified butter along with 55 litres of synthetic essence used to prepare it, police said. A...","search_text":"$93"},{"article_id":"7ddc7283-670a-4dfb-9e38-a11aa0c579c2","slug":"ghee-7ddc7283-670a-4dfb-9e38-a11aa0c579c2","title":"1,500 kg spurious ‘desi ghee’ seized during raid in Delhi’s Alipur","source":"indianexpress.com","date":"2025-12-04","url":"https://indianexpress.com/article/cities/delhi/1500-kg-spurious-desi-ghee-seized-during-raid-in-delhis-alipur-10402192/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit"],"adulterants":["synthetic essence"],"actions":["raid","seizure","FIR"],"locations":["Delhi, Alipur, India"],"primary_state":"Delhi","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"Acting on specific information on Tuesday, a team of the Outernorth district raided the premises of Bansal Agro Food Industries in Kheda Kalan, he said. “The factory was involved in manufacturing and packaging fake desi...","search_text":"$94"},{"article_id":"oil-d6d2041d0727d059","slug":"oil-d6d2041d0727d059","title":"Inspection throws up health scare in form of expired foods, fake oil | Jaipur News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-12-03","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/jaipur/inspection-throws-up-health-scare-in-form-of-expired-foods-fake-oil/articleshow/125727900.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.7491401562006129,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["groundnut oil"],"issue_types":["counterfeit","substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","sample collection"],"locations":["Jaipur, Rajasthan, India"],"primary_state":"Rajasthan","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Jaipur: Health department food safety officers Tuesday found expired food products stored on racks during an inspection at Amazon Seller Services Pvt Ltd in Jhotwara Industrial Area. The expired items included coriander...","search_text":"$95"},{"article_id":"2b442757-da6a-46e5-ae37-b083e00062d3","slug":"ghee-2b442757-da6a-46e5-ae37-b083e00062d3","title":"Patanjali ghee fails quality tests; Company fined Rs 1.40 lakh in Uttarakhand","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2025-12-01","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/nation/2025/Dec/01/patanjali-ghee-fails-quality-tests-company-fined-rs-140-lakh-in-uttarakhand","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.73159006,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["lab_confirmed"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":["adulterants"],"actions":["fine"],"locations":["Pithoragarh, Uttarakhand, India"],"primary_state":"Uttarakhand","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":8,"excerpt":"PITHORAGARH: A sample of ghee manufactured by the prominent Indian company Patanjali has failed quality control tests, leading to significant penalties imposed by a local court in Uttarakhand. The failure, confirmed by...","search_text":"$96"},{"article_id":"c66f7c07-f922-4abd-8805-71a0fade560f","slug":"ghee-c66f7c07-f922-4abd-8805-71a0fade560f","title":"Despite CFTRI red flag, adulterated ghee used in laddus for 2 years: SIT","source":"thehansindia.com","date":"2025-11-30","url":"https://www.thehansindia.com/andhra-pradesh/despite-cftri-red-flag-adulterated-ghee-used-in-laddus-for-2-years-sit-1027304","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"provisional","validation_confidence":null,"event_count":2,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["CFTRI identified beta-sitosterol, a marker of vegetable oil adulteration, in ghee samples.","Ghee blended with palm oil, palmolein, palm kernel oil, beta-carotene, acetic acid ester and ghee-flavouring agents continued entering TTD stores and was used in laddu preparation until 2024."],"locations":["India, Tirupati"],"accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":8,"excerpt":"Tirupati: The CBI-led Special Investigation Team (SIT) found that adulterated ghee was used in preparing the Tirumala laddu prasadam for almost two years after the Central Food Technological Research Institute (CFTRI),...","search_text":"$97"},{"article_id":"60ccacb1-7c41-4259-b651-bfbf60e7b53a","slug":"ghee-60ccacb1-7c41-4259-b651-bfbf60e7b53a","title":"SIT names 12 more officials, experts in Tirupati laddu ghee case","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2025-11-30","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/tamil-nadu/2025/Nov/30/sit-names-12-more-officials-experts-in-tirupati-laddu-ghee-case","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.22025437,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["adulterated ghee"],"actions":["naming of accused"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":10,"excerpt":"TIRUPATI: The Supreme Court-appointed CBI-led Special Investigation Team (SIT) probing the adulterated ghee scam linked to the preparation of Srivari Laddu Prasadam at Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) has named 12...","search_text":"$98"},{"article_id":"47635cd8-696c-4adf-94ed-338f084a3d62","slug":"ghee-47635cd8-696c-4adf-94ed-338f084a3d62","title":"Adulterated ghee: Former TTD procurement GM colluded with dairy firms, says SIT | Vijayawada News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-11-30","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/vijayawada/adulterated-ghee-former-ttd-procurement-gm-colluded-with-dairy-firms-says-sit/articleshow/125660944.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.46981636,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["vegetable oils"],"actions":["arrest","investigation"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"Tirupati: The special investigation team probing the TTD laddu ghee adulteration case has established alleged connivance between RSSVR Subrahmanyam, the temple body's former general manager (procurement), and promoters...","search_text":"$99"},{"article_id":"5c86116b-5fae-45a9-b467-01fc8b26a166","slug":"ghee-5c86116b-5fae-45a9-b467-01fc8b26a166","title":"SIT Adds 11 More Accused in Tirumala Adulterated Ghee Case","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2025-11-29","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/andhra-pradesh/sit-adds-11-more-accused-in-tirumala-adulterated-ghee-case-1920432","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.22987398,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["adulterated ghee"],"actions":["adding accused"],"locations":["Tirumala, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"Total number of accused reaches 35; memo filed in Nellore ACB Court Tirumala: The Special Investigation Team (SIT) probing the adulterated ghee scandal involving Tirumala laddu preparation has added 11 more persons to...","search_text":"SIT Adds 11 More Accused in Tirumala Adulterated Ghee Case deccanchronicle.com Total number of accused reaches 35; memo filed in Nellore ACB Court\nTirumala: The Special Investigation Team (SIT) probing the adulterated ghee scandal involving Tirumala laddu preparation has added 11 more persons to the list of accused. Earlier, the team had named 15 persons at the time of filing the case, followed by the addition of nine more individuals during the investigation. ghee adulteration adulterated ghee adding accused alleged Tirumala, Andhra Pradesh, India Tirumala laddu fflo:hasAdulterant adulterated ghee adulterated ghee scandal involving Tirumala laddu preparation Tirumala ghee adulteration case prov:used Tirumala laddu adulterated ghee scandal involving Tirumala laddu preparation Tirumala ghee adulteration case prov:wasAssociatedWith 35 accused persons Total number of accused reaches 35"},{"article_id":"2a59f77c-89ba-49fe-be6c-b3c9756a9940","slug":"ghee-2a59f77c-89ba-49fe-be6c-b3c9756a9940","title":"CBI-SIT arraigns seven TTD staffers and five external dairy experts as accused in TTD laddu ghee adulteration case | Vijayawada News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-11-29","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/vijayawada/cbi-sit-arraigns-seven-ttd-staffers-and-five-external-dairy-experts-as-accused-in-ttd-laddu-ghee-adulteration-case/articleshow/125645217.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.20558642,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["unknown"],"actions":["arraignment"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":12,"excerpt":"Tirupati: The CBI-led special investigation team (SIT) arraigned seven staffers of the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) and five external dairy experts as accused in the TTD laddu ghee adulteration case. The SIT,...","search_text":"$9a"},{"article_id":"0e464dfa-d504-4806-9005-c1ba38758bf8","slug":"ghee-0e464dfa-d504-4806-9005-c1ba38758bf8","title":"Spiked Ghee Flowed In As TTD Neglected Plant Inspections for Six Years","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2025-11-29","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/andhra-pradesh/spiked-ghee-flowed-in-as-ttd-neglected-plant-inspections-for-six-years-1920554","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"provisional","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.43356803,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":3,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["suppression","supply"],"locations":["India, Tirupati"],"accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":14,"excerpt":"Significantly, the SIT cited specific inspections to show how the process had been bypassed. Tirupati: Inspecting supplier plants is a mandatory part of the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams’ ghee procurement system. No...","search_text":"$9b"},{"article_id":"008cc0e4-d7d7-475f-80d8-d81621e7b862","slug":"ghee-008cc0e4-d7d7-475f-80d8-d81621e7b862","title":"7 TTD Officials, 5 Dairy Experts Arraigned In Ghee Adulteration Case","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2025-11-29","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/andhra-pradesh/ttd-gm-concealed-tirumala-ghee-adulteration-report-says-sit-remand-report-1920315","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.45619937,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["adulterated ghee"],"actions":["arraignment"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"Fraudulent deals involved hundreds of crores of rupees: Court TIRUPATI: A remand memo submitted by investigators to the SPE and ACB Court in Nellore on Friday, with new names, has widened the Tirumala laddu ghee...","search_text":"$9c"},{"article_id":"abb94f1c-6bf3-442d-9749-eacc170b025c","slug":"ghee-abb94f1c-6bf3-442d-9749-eacc170b025c","title":"TTD Official Arrested in Tirumala Laddu Ghee Adulteration Case","source":"newkerala.com","date":"2025-11-28","url":"https://www.newkerala.com/news/o/laddu-adulteration-case-sit-arrests-tirumala-temple-official-593","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.19632259,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["arrest"],"locations":["India, Tirumala"],"accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Laddu adulteration case: SIT arrests Tirumala temple official Tirupati, Nov 28 The Supreme Court-appointed Special Investigation Team (SIT) has arrested a serving official of Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam (TTD) in the...","search_text":"$9d"},{"article_id":"2f23ec7d-e712-46f5-ae1c-5e7634725242","slug":"ghee-2f23ec7d-e712-46f5-ae1c-5e7634725242","title":"TTD officer arrested in ghee case","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2025-11-28","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/andhra-pradesh/2025/Nov/28/ttd-officer-arrested-in-ghee-case","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.30495391,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["adulterated ghee"],"actions":["arrest"],"locations":["Tirupati, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"TIRUPATI: The Supreme Court-appointed CBI-led Special Investigation Team (SIT) on Thursday arrested a serving TTD officer in the Srivari Laddu adulterated ghee case, marking a major breakthrough. The SIT took into...","search_text":"$9e"},{"article_id":"1c7ea343-020a-4266-9854-b12ebfa2cf50","slug":"ghee-1c7ea343-020a-4266-9854-b12ebfa2cf50","title":"Tirupati laddu scam: CBI-SIT makes 1st arrest within TTD, nabs senior procurement official | Hyderabad News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-11-28","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/hyderabad/sit-arrests-ttd-official-in-laddu-ghee-adulteration-case/articleshow/125623060.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.32447742,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["adulterated ghee"],"actions":["arrest"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":8,"excerpt":"TIRUPATI: The CBI-led special investigation team (SIT) on Thursday made the first arrest within Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) in connection with the multi-crore laddu ghee adulteration case, taking into custody...","search_text":"$9f"},{"article_id":"8205ac1a-be22-438c-b3e0-f7aa463d3501","slug":"ghee-8205ac1a-be22-438c-b3e0-f7aa463d3501","title":"Tirumala Laddoo Adulteration Row: YSRCP Questions Transparency of Testing Under Previous Regime | VIDEO","source":"india.com","date":"2025-11-27","url":"https://zeenews.india.com/india/tirumala-laddoo-ghee-adulteration-yv-subba-reddy-chandrababu-2989573.html","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.27597358,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee","Tirumala Laddoo"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":[],"locations":["Tirumala, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":0,"excerpt":"The controversy over the alleged adulteration of ghee used in the preparation of the famous Tirumala Venkateswara Temple prasadam - laddoos - has escalated, with YSR Congress Party MP YV Subba Reddy raising serious...","search_text":"$a0"},{"article_id":"6cf864fb-5956-4416-a1c5-f42153e66ec4","slug":"ghee-6cf864fb-5956-4416-a1c5-f42153e66ec4","title":"Indore Fake Ghee Case: Accused Tries To Fool Police About Location; Tracked & Arrested From Own House","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2025-11-27","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/indore/indore-fake-ghee-case-accused-tries-to-fool-police-about-location-tracked-arrested-from-own-house","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["arrest"],"locations":["Indore (, Madhya Pradesh, India, Indore (Madhya Pradesh)"],"primary_state":"Madhya Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Indore (Madhya Pradesh): The man booked for preparing fake ghee, tried to fool the police by claiming he was out of the city, but was caught through his mobile tower location, police said on Wednesday. After an FIR was...","search_text":"$a1"},{"article_id":"672ecfdb-cb9d-485d-8fc1-76e6a8269fe7","slug":"ghee-672ecfdb-cb9d-485d-8fc1-76e6a8269fe7","title":"Couple from Mysuru held in fake Nandini ghee racket","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2025-11-27","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/cities/bengaluru/2025/Nov/27/couple-from-mysuru-held-in-fake-nandini-ghee-racket","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit"],"adulterants":["coconut oil","palm oil"],"actions":["arrest","seizure","asset_freeze"],"locations":["Mysuru, Karnataka, India"],"primary_state":"Karnataka","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":12,"excerpt":"BENGALURU: The Central Crime Branch (CCB) has arrested a couple from Mysuru in connection with the racket in selling adulterated ghee under Nandini brand. Earlier, the CCB arrested four people, including a distributor...","search_text":"$a2"},{"article_id":"502ff9a1-ac00-4ef2-96cb-0a0614085766","slug":"ghee-502ff9a1-ac00-4ef2-96cb-0a0614085766","title":"Fake Nandini Ghee racket: Mysuru couple arrested - Star of Mysore","source":"starofmysore.com","date":"2025-11-27","url":"https://starofmysore.com/fake-nandini-ghee-racket-mysuru-couple-arrested/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee","fake Nandini ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit"],"adulterants":["low-grade edible oils"],"actions":["arrest","seizure","asset_freezing"],"locations":["Mysuru, Karnataka, India"],"primary_state":"Karnataka","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":18,"excerpt":"After bail, 2021 Mysuru Hosahundi ghee gang resurfaces in Tamil Nadu Mysuru/Bengaluru: A Mysuru couple, believed to be at the centre of a large-scale counterfeit Nandini ghee racket, has been arrested by Central Crime...","search_text":"$a3"},{"article_id":"3278338f-1fa0-4045-9701-e237d5ad0930","slug":"ghee-3278338f-1fa0-4045-9701-e237d5ad0930","title":"Industrial machines, clever repackaging: How a husband-wife duo built cross-state fake Nandini Ghee empire across Tamil Nadu, Karnataka; arrested | Bengaluru News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-11-27","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/bengaluru/couple-arrested-for-distributing-adulterated-nandini-ghee-in-karnataka-tamil-nadu/articleshow/125597159.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.87896605,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit"],"adulterants":["palm oil","coconut oil","dalda"],"actions":["arrest","freeze assets","raid"],"locations":["Bengaluru, Karnataka, India"],"primary_state":"Karnataka","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":13,"excerpt":"BENGALURU: Days after busting the fake Nandini ghee racket that stretched across Karnataka and Tamil Nadu, Central Crime Branch sleuths Wednesday arrested husband-wife duo â Shivakumar and Ramya â alleged masterminds of...","search_text":"$a4"},{"article_id":"0e518ac8-dc53-4c79-938a-bd26c1142eeb","slug":"ghee-0e518ac8-dc53-4c79-938a-bd26c1142eeb","title":"CCB police nab kingpin couple manufacturing fake Nandini ghee","source":"thehansindia.com","date":"2025-11-27","url":"https://www.thehansindia.com/karnataka/ccb-police-nab-kingpin-couple-manufacturing-fake-nandini-ghee-1026667","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit","mislabeling"],"adulterants":["spurious ghee"],"actions":["arrest","seizure","asset freeze"],"locations":["Mysuru, Karnataka, India"],"primary_state":"Karnataka","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":10,"excerpt":"The City Crime Branch (CCB) has arrested a Mysuru-based couple, identified as Shivakumar and his wife Ramya, who are alleged to be the key masterminds behind the fake Nandini ghee manufacturing racket operating across...","search_text":"$a5"},{"article_id":"94d114b9-3c47-468e-8714-ed449f90e8e4","slug":"ghee-94d114b9-3c47-468e-8714-ed449f90e8e4","title":"Kingpin couple arrested in Karnataka's fake ‘Nandini’ ghee racket, manufactured products in Tamil Nadu","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2025-11-26","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/india-news/kingpin-couple-arrested-in-karnatakas-fake-nandini-ghee-racket-manufactured-products-in-tamil-nadu-101764146635230.html","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.87786123,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit"],"adulterants":["adulterated ghee"],"actions":["arrest","seizure","case registration"],"locations":["Bengaluru, Karnataka, India"],"primary_state":"Karnataka","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"Kingpin couple arrested in Karnataka's fake ‘Nandini’ ghee racket, manufactured products in Tamil Nadu Arrests of Ramya and husband Shivakumar came after manufacturing unit was raided by Central Crime Branch (CCB),...","search_text":"$a6"},{"article_id":"5a7bde0b-59e0-4f86-9b63-2bbebb593d41","slug":"ghee-5a7bde0b-59e0-4f86-9b63-2bbebb593d41","title":"'Nandini' Ghee Racket: Who Is The Couple Behind Running Major Fake ‘Nandini’ Ghee Unit In Bengaluru","source":"newsx.com","date":"2025-11-26","url":"https://www.newsx.com/india/nandini-ghee-racket-who-is-the-couple-behind-running-major-fake-nandini-ghee-unit-in-bengaluru-115687/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit"],"adulterants":["coconut and palm oil"],"actions":["arrest","seizure"],"locations":["Bengaluru, Karnataka, India"],"primary_state":"Karnataka","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":15,"excerpt":"The Central Crime Branch (CCB) arrested a couple accused of running a major fake ‘Nandini’ ghee racket in Bengaluru. Officers detained Shivakumar and his wife Ramya after they identified them as key operators in the...","search_text":"$a7"},{"article_id":"526515f5-4a82-4b0b-9e1c-7f3a2aa4cde4","slug":"ghee-526515f5-4a82-4b0b-9e1c-7f3a2aa4cde4","title":"CCB arrests couple from Mysuru, kingpins of fake Nandini ghee racket","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2025-11-26","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/karnataka/ccb-arrests-couple-from-mysuru-kingpins-of-fake-nandini-ghee-racket/article70326249.ece","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.91472341,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit"],"adulterants":["substandard products"],"actions":["arrest","raid","bank account freeze","seizure of documents and equipment"],"locations":["Mysuru, Karnataka, India"],"primary_state":"Karnataka","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"Continuing investigations into the adulterated and fake Nandini ghee racket, officials of the Central Crime Branch have arrested a couple from Mysuru, kingpins of the racket, which they were allegedly running for many...","search_text":"$a8"},{"article_id":"2fc5c9f1-64d2-498f-8f7a-96d94b926f6d","slug":"ghee-2fc5c9f1-64d2-498f-8f7a-96d94b926f6d","title":"Nandini ghee begins global journey as KMF launches exports | Bengaluru News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-11-26","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/bengaluru/nandini-ghee-begins-global-journey-as-kmf-launches-exports/articleshow/125569460.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.54482706,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit"],"adulterants":["adulterated ghee"],"actions":["busted a counterfeit racket"],"locations":["Bengaluru, Karnataka, India"],"primary_state":"Karnataka","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Bengaluru: The state's iconic Nandini ghee, produced by Karnataka Milk Federation (KMF), has begun its overseas journey with exports to Australia, the US and Saudi Arabia. Chief minister Siddaramaiah flagged off the...","search_text":"$a9"},{"article_id":"ab7d0ab2-d774-415c-bd3f-a606f92ef3c3","slug":"ghee-ab7d0ab2-d774-415c-bd3f-a606f92ef3c3","title":"Explained: How Fake Ghee Slipped Into Tirupati Devasthanam's Laddus For 5 Years","source":"swarajyamag.com","date":"2025-11-24","url":"https://swarajyamag.com/culture/explained-how-fake-ghee-slipped-into-tirupati-devasthanams-laddus-for-5-years","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.32174723,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["palm oil","palmolein","chemical flavouring agents","ghee essence"],"actions":["arrests"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":13,"excerpt":"When Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu claimed last year that the ghee used for Tirumala’s iconic laddu prasadam had been adulterated with animal fat, it sparked a nationwide uproar. Hindus across the...","search_text":"$aa"},{"article_id":"a3ce7cd2-ee71-42ce-b4f7-96a81c6bd295","slug":"ghee-a3ce7cd2-ee71-42ce-b4f7-96a81c6bd295","title":"Tirumala laddu ghee adulteration case reveals shocking details","source":"siasat.com","date":"2025-11-23","url":"https://www.siasat.com/tirumala-laddu-ghee-adulteration-case-reveals-shocking-details-3299980/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.40376953,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal fat","palm oil","palm kernel oil"],"actions":["investigation","arrest"],"locations":["Tirumala, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":11,"excerpt":"Hyderabad: The Special Investigation Team (SIT) of the Central Bureau of Investigation probing the Tirumala laddu ghee adulteration case revealed that nearly 20.1 crore laddus out of the 48.76 crore prepared between...","search_text":"$ab"},{"article_id":"1fe9639d-5c39-472e-94a7-73ac2b03bfce","slug":"ghee-1fe9639d-5c39-472e-94a7-73ac2b03bfce","title":"SIT uncovers massive ghee adulteration!","source":"thehansindia.com","date":"2025-11-23","url":"https://www.thehansindia.com/andhra-pradesh/sit-uncovers-massive-ghee-adulteration-1025488","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.3474468,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["palm oil"],"actions":["investigation"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":13,"excerpt":"Tirupati: The disclosure that nearly 20 crore Tirumala laddus were made using adulterated ghee over five years has emerged as the most disturbing finding in the CBI-monitored inquiry into food-quality violations at the...","search_text":"$ac"},{"article_id":"8577ca11-d1ef-4517-846f-747a51b46f07","slug":"ghee-8577ca11-d1ef-4517-846f-747a51b46f07","title":"SIT grills Subba Reddy in ghee adulteration probe","source":"thehansindia.com","date":"2025-11-21","url":"https://www.thehansindia.com/andhra-pradesh/sit-grills-subba-reddy-in-ghee-adulteration-probe-1025041","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.9,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.26128931,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["adulterated ghee"],"actions":["questioning","investigation"],"locations":["Hyderabad, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"Vijayawada: A Special Investigation Team (SIT) on Thursday questioned former Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) chairman Y V Subba Reddy in Hyderabad in connection with the alleged supply of adulterated ghee used in...","search_text":"$ad"},{"article_id":"39e61860-2a60-448c-838e-a7f01e4d0c5c","slug":"ghee-39e61860-2a60-448c-838e-a7f01e4d0c5c","title":"SIT to grill TTD Chairman YV Subba Reddy in ghee case in Hyderabad today","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2025-11-20","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/andhra-pradesh/2025/Nov/20/sit-to-grill-ttd-chairman-yv-subba-reddy-in-ghee-case-in-hyderabad-today","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.27870928,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["adulterated ghee"],"actions":["interrogation","investigation"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"TIRUPATI: The investigation into the TTD laddu ghee adulteration scandal has reached a critical juncture, with the Supreme Court-appointed Special Investigation Team (SIT) preparing a questionnaire to ask former...","search_text":"$ae"},{"article_id":"aec84261-126b-4386-b0f4-15f160ca67ae","slug":"ghee-aec84261-126b-4386-b0f4-15f160ca67ae","title":"Ghee Adulteration: SIT Begins Questioning Of Chinna Appanna","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2025-11-18","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/andhra-pradesh/ghee-adulteration-sit-begins-questioning-of-chinna-appanna-1917792","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.34547303,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution","contamination"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["custody_granted","questioning"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Appanna was brought to the SIT office in Tirupati on Monday after the Nellore ACB Court granted five days’ custody to the investigation team. TIRUPATI: The Special Investigation Team has begun questioning Kaduru Chinna...","search_text":"$af"},{"article_id":"f1307eae-cbfb-4f04-b6cc-3facd9e296d6","slug":"ghee-f1307eae-cbfb-4f04-b6cc-3facd9e296d6","title":"Fake Nandini ghee racket busted in Bengaluru; dip in orders exposed accused","source":"indiatoday.in","date":"2025-11-17","url":"https://www.indiatoday.in/cities/bengaluru/story/bengaluru-fake-ghee-racket-kmf-distributor-adulterated-nandini-ghee-2821014-2025-11-17?utm_source=rss","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.93228001,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit"],"adulterants":["palm oil"],"actions":["raid","arrest","seizure"],"locations":["Bengaluru, Karnataka, India"],"primary_state":"Karnataka","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":11,"excerpt":"Fake Nandini ghee racket busted in Bengaluru; dip in orders exposed accused Karnataka Milk Federation officials busted a fake ghee racket run by an authorised distributor in Bengaluru. The distributor allegedly diluted...","search_text":"$b0"},{"article_id":"31cae76c-aa62-4328-bd40-368275f60e9f","slug":"ghee-31cae76c-aa62-4328-bd40-368275f60e9f","title":"Bengaluru Distributor Busted For Selling Diluted 'Nandini' Ghee In Fake Racket, What We Know So Far","source":"newsx.com","date":"2025-11-17","url":"https://www.newsx.com/regionals/bengaluru-distributor-busted-for-selling-diluted-nandini-ghee-in-fake-racket-what-we-know-so-far-111748/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["palm oil","cheap fats"],"actions":["raid","arrest","seizure"],"locations":["Bengaluru, Karnataka, India"],"primary_state":"Karnataka","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":11,"excerpt":"Bengaluru Police have busted a fake ghee racket, in collaboration with the Karnataka Milk Federation, involving adulterated products being sold in the name of one of Karnataka’s most trusted dairy brands, Nandini. The...","search_text":"$b1"},{"article_id":"6411a3a1-2932-41eb-b497-f9a2400de74c","slug":"ghee-6411a3a1-2932-41eb-b497-f9a2400de74c","title":"SIT summons Y.V. Subba Reddy aide  in TTD ghee adulteration case","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2025-11-16","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/andhra-pradesh/sit-summons-yv-subba-reddy-aide-in-ttd-ghee-adulteration-case/article70287376.ece","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.23211154,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["summons","arrest"],"locations":["Tirumala, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"T Kaduru Chinna Appanna, a close aide and assistant of Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) former Chairman Y.V. Subba Reddy, has been summoned by the Special Investigation Team (SIT) which is currently probing the...","search_text":"$b2"},{"article_id":"4a638904-2bcf-4037-8afd-ec6e5b0b6b11","slug":"ghee-4a638904-2bcf-4037-8afd-ec6e5b0b6b11","title":"CCB busts massive adulterated ghee racket; fake Nandini products worth Rs 1.26 crore seized in Bengaluru","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2025-11-16","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/karnataka/2025/Nov/16/ccb-busts-massive-adulterated-ghee-racket-fake-nandini-products-worth-rs-126-crore-seized-in-bengaluru","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["coconut oil","palm oil"],"actions":["arrest","seizure"],"locations":["Bengaluru, Karnataka, India"],"primary_state":"Karnataka","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":15,"excerpt":"BENGALURU: A large network producing adulterated ghee in Tamil Nadu, filling it into fake Nandini-branded sachets and plastic bottles and selling it across Bengaluru has been busted in a joint operation conducted by...","search_text":"$b3"},{"article_id":"f19a484a-77bd-4389-8266-523228328091","slug":"ghee-f19a484a-77bd-4389-8266-523228328091","title":"Lawyer moves NHRC over Tirupati ghee scandal, calls it ‘national betrayal of faith’","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2025-11-15","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/cities/mumbai-news/lawyer-moves-nhrc-over-tirupati-ghee-scandal-calls-it-national-betrayal-of-faith-101763146583311.html","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.31616419,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["fish oil","lard"],"actions":["complaint_filed"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"Lawyer moves NHRC over Tirupati ghee scandal, calls it ‘national betrayal of faith’ Adulterated ghee was used to make prasadam for lakhs of devotees, which constituted “a national betrayal of faith”, advocate Hitendra...","search_text":"$b4"},{"article_id":"b5940660-7f58-4123-bb25-6f78d4e1694d","slug":"ghee-b5940660-7f58-4123-bb25-6f78d4e1694d","title":"Bengaluru police crackdown uncovers counterfeit ‘Nandini’ ghee racket: How the network operated","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2025-11-15","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/india-news/bengaluru-police-cracks-down-on-network-circulating-counterfeit-nandini-ghee-8-136-litres-seized-101763221328365.html","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit"],"adulterants":["coconut oil","palm oil"],"actions":["raid","arrest","seizure","case registration"],"locations":["Bengaluru, Karnataka, India"],"primary_state":"Karnataka","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"Bengaluru police crackdown uncovers counterfeit ‘Nandini’ ghee racket: How the network operated Authorities confiscated 8,136 liters of adulterated ghee, machinery, and cash, with a total value of ₹1.27 crore in a...","search_text":"$b5"},{"article_id":"3c0e9d23-f858-47eb-8e7a-23db1d42822a","slug":"ghee-3c0e9d23-f858-47eb-8e7a-23db1d42822a","title":"CCB unearths interstate racket selling adulterated Nandini ghee; 8,136 litres seized","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2025-11-15","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/karnataka/ccb-unearths-interstate-racket-selling-adulterated-nandini-ghee-8136-litres-seized/article70283406.ece","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit"],"adulterants":["coconut oil","palm oil"],"actions":["raid","seizure","arrest"],"locations":["Bengaluru, Karnataka, India"],"primary_state":"Karnataka","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"The Central Crime Branch (CCB) has dismantled a large interstate network involved in producing adulterated ghee in Tamil Nadu, packing it in fake Nandini-branded sachets and bottles, and distributing it across...","search_text":"$b6"},{"article_id":"c999d71f-777d-4d80-9f37-37391f97acd4","slug":"ghee-c999d71f-777d-4d80-9f37-37391f97acd4","title":"Tirumala ghee adulteration case: SIT grills Dharma Reddy for second day","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2025-11-13","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/andhra-pradesh/2025/Nov/13/tirumala-ghee-adulteration-case-sit-grills-dharma-reddy-for-second-day","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.33979141,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution","unsafe_food"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["questioning","search"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"TIRUPATI: The SC-appointed Special Investigation Team (SIT), led by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), on Wednesday continued questioning former Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) Additional Executive Officer...","search_text":"$b7"},{"article_id":"1addfba0-b7e9-4722-85be-a642cdf63571","slug":"ghee-1addfba0-b7e9-4722-85be-a642cdf63571","title":"Singed by adulterated ghee controversy, Tirupati temple board now puts focus on quality of rice","source":"indianexpress.com","date":"2025-11-13","url":"https://indianexpress.com/article/cities/hyderabad/adulterated-ghee-controversy-tirupati-temple-board-puts-focus-quality-rice-10364190/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.15416958,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["unknown"],"actions":["chargesheet"],"locations":["Tirupati, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"Singed by adulterated ghee controversy, Tirupati temple board now puts focus on quality of rice Sri Venkateswara temple at Tirumala in Andhra Pradesh’s Tirupati district uses tonnes of rice daily for its annaprasadam....","search_text":"$b8"},{"article_id":"8ecfae6d-fb77-4dfe-9f9b-f1425d8a13da","slug":"ghee-8ecfae6d-fb77-4dfe-9f9b-f1425d8a13da","title":"Pawan Kalyan Sanatana Dharma Board Tirupati Laddu Ghee","source":"newkerala.com","date":"2025-11-12","url":"https://www.newkerala.com/news/o/andhra-dy-cm-pawan-kalyan-calls-sanatana-dharma-parirakshana-808","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.14851667,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee","Tirupati Laddu"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["chemicals","animal fat","spurious types of oils"],"actions":["investigation"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":7,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":0,"excerpt":"Andhra Dy CM Pawan Kalyan calls for 'Sanatana Dharma Parirakshana Board' amid Tirupati Laddu ghee row Amaravati, November 12 Andhra Pradesh Deputy Chief Minister Pawan Kalyan called for the establishment of a 'Sanatana...","search_text":"$b9"},{"article_id":"6135126e-45b3-4fe7-a80f-82248b08ea7b","slug":"ghee-6135126e-45b3-4fe7-a80f-82248b08ea7b","title":"TTD Laddu Ghee Scam: Ex-EO AV Dharma Reddy Questioned For Second Day By CBI-Led SIT In Tirupati","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2025-11-12","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/india/ttd-laddu-ghee-scam-ex-eo-av-dharma-reddy-questioned-for-second-day-by-cbi-led-sit-in-tirupati","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.35635981,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["spurious ghee"],"actions":["questioning","arrest"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Tirupati: Former Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam (TTD) Executive Officer (EO) A. V. Dharma Reddy appeared before the Special Investigation Team (SIT) probing the TTD laddu ghee adulteration case for the second day on...","search_text":"$ba"},{"article_id":"5406e730-2d78-47b4-ba27-fc933e691eab","slug":"ghee-5406e730-2d78-47b4-ba27-fc933e691eab","title":"SIT Grills Former TTD EO For 9 Hours In Adulterated Ghee Probe","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2025-11-12","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/andhra-pradesh/sit-grills-former-ttd-eo-for-9-hours-in-adulterated-ghee-probe-1916429","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.36368323,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","prohibited_additive"],"adulterants":["synthetic ghee"],"actions":["questioning","investigation"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"The SIT has also issued notices to former TTD chairman and YSRC Rajya Sabha member Y. V. Subba Reddy to appear on November 13. He has sought a short extension citing parliamentary commitments. Tirupati:The CBI-led...","search_text":"$bb"},{"article_id":"1bb0d3e5-6f04-4d91-a899-8b6f59bc228a","slug":"ghee-1bb0d3e5-6f04-4d91-a899-8b6f59bc228a","title":"SIT grills ex-Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams Additional EO in ghee adulteration case","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2025-11-12","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/andhra-pradesh/2025/Nov/12/sit-grills-ex-tirumala-tirupati-devasthanams-additional-eo-in-ghee-adulteration-case","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.21629407,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":3,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["manufacture of adulterated ghee by Bhole Baba","ghee was reportedly blended with palm oil, palm kernel oil, and palmolein","ghee was reportedly blended with chemicals like beta-carotene, acetic acid ester, and artificial ghee flavour"],"locations":["India, Tirumala temple, Tirupati"],"accepted_triplet_count":7,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"TIRUPATI: The Supreme Court-appointed Special Investigation Team (SIT), led by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), has ramped up its probe into the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) ghee adulteration case,...","search_text":"$bc"},{"article_id":"e53f3cca-ca53-449c-9f09-737f317fb169","slug":"ghee-e53f3cca-ca53-449c-9f09-737f317fb169","title":"Tirumala Laddu scam: 68 lakh kg of adulterated ghee supplied to TTD, says CBI","source":"thehindubusinessline.com","date":"2025-11-11","url":"https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/news/tirumala-laddu-scam-68-lakh-kg-of-adulterated-ghee-supplied-to-ttd-says-cbi/article70267120.ece","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"provisional","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.58384423,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["investigation"],"locations":["New, Delhi, India, Tirumala, Bhagwanpur, Malganga, New Delhi"],"primary_state":"Delhi","accepted_triplet_count":7,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"A Special Investigation Team (SIT) of the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) has ‘found’ that 68 lakh tonnes of ghee, worth ₹251 crore, supplied to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) was adulterated for three...","search_text":"$bd"},{"article_id":"e1bbca7c-14db-40cf-a128-0219f12466a3","slug":"ghee-e1bbca7c-14db-40cf-a128-0219f12466a3","title":"NHRC Complaint Filed Over Tirupati Ghee Scandal: Activist Calls It 'National Betrayal Of Faith'","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2025-11-11","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/mumbai/nhrc-complaint-filed-over-tirupati-ghee-scandal-activist-calls-it-national-betrayal-of-faith","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.33376998,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":3,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["fake ghee","foul-smelling ghee"],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Ambaji, Banaskantha, Gujarat, India","Kendrapara, Odisha, India","Amritsar, Punjab, India"],"primary_state":"Gujarat","accepted_triplet_count":6,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":10,"excerpt":"A complaint has been filed before the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) over the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) ghee scandal, where nearly 68 lakh kilograms of synthetic fat was allegedly used in the...","search_text":"$be"},{"article_id":"d20d6d55-e1d9-462f-902a-31987fc17f06","slug":"ghee-d20d6d55-e1d9-462f-902a-31987fc17f06","title":"Laddu Ghee Adulteration: Ex-TTD Chief Called for Questioning by SIT","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2025-11-11","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/andhra-pradesh/laddu-ghee-adulteration-ex-ttd-chief-called-for-questioning-by-sit-1916171","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.26891393,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":2,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["investigation"],"locations":["India, Tirupati"],"accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":11,"excerpt":"The SIT would examine his role as administrative head of the TTD during the period when adulterated ghee was supplied to the temple. Sources said the questioning of the former EO would focus on procurementprocedures,...","search_text":"$bf"},{"article_id":"c7af7c66-9a6d-42c8-8695-bcd164ed856b","slug":"ghee-c7af7c66-9a6d-42c8-8695-bcd164ed856b","title":"Uttarakhand dairy dupes TTD with 68 lakh kg of fake ghee, CBI probe finds","source":"siasat.com","date":"2025-11-11","url":"https://www.siasat.com/uttarakhand-dairy-dupes-ttd-with-68-lakh-kg-of-fake-ghee-cbi-probe-finds-3294521/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.54482018,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal fat"],"actions":["probe"],"locations":["Uttarakhand, India"],"primary_state":"Uttarakhand","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":12,"excerpt":"Hyderabad: A dairy in Uttarakhand has become a talking point as it duped the Tirumala Tirupathi Devasthanam with 68 lakh kg of fake ghee worth Rs 250 crore. A probe by the CBI into the Tirupathi ghee adulteration...","search_text":"$c0"},{"article_id":"5f6c5fd0-a2f8-4bfe-9ac4-a8d06bc8640a","slug":"ghee-5f6c5fd0-a2f8-4bfe-9ac4-a8d06bc8640a","title":"Sajjala accuses Naidu of politicising Tirumala ghee row, seeks CBI probe","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2025-11-11","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/andhra-pradesh/sajjala-accuses-naidu-of-politicising-tirumala-ghee-row-seeks-cbi-probe/article70267707.ece","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.18616187,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["palm oil","palm stearin"],"actions":["blacklisting"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":5,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":0,"excerpt":"The YSR Congress Party (YSRCP) State Coordinator, Sajjala Ramakrishna Reddy, on Tuesday accused Chief Minister N. Chandrababu Naidu of “hurting the sentiments of millions of Tirumala devotees” for political gain by...","search_text":"$c1"},{"article_id":"4260e03f-c3cd-480c-827c-7ebe3a09e913","slug":"ghee-4260e03f-c3cd-480c-827c-7ebe3a09e913","title":"Delhi businessman's judicial custody sought for supplying 'chemicals' used to adulterate ghee for Tirupati laddus","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2025-11-11","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/india-news/delhi-businessman-s-judicial-custody-sought-for-supplying-chemicals-used-to-adulterate-ghee-for-tirupati-laddus-101762802834491.html","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"event_count":3,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["adulterate ghee for Tirupati laddus","mixing adulterants such as palm oil, palm kernel oil and palmolein","chemicals such as beta carotene, acetic acid ester, ghee flavour and other adulterants were used"],"locations":["India, Tirupati"],"accepted_triplet_count":7,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":18,"excerpt":"Delhi businessman's judicial custody sought for supplying 'chemicals' used to adulterate ghee for Tirupati laddus Nellore , The SIT probing the Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration case has sought the judicial custody of...","search_text":"$c2"},{"article_id":"fa93085f-260f-4f91-af1c-c85c03ca06fa","slug":"ghee-fa93085f-260f-4f91-af1c-c85c03ca06fa","title":"Bhole Baba promoters supplied rejected ghee stocks of AR dairy back to TTD through Vyshnavi dairy | Vijayawada News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-11-10","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/vijayawada/bhole-baba-promoters-supplied-rejected-ghee-stocks-of-ar-dairy-back-to-ttd-through-vyshnavi-dairy/articleshow/125205607.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.40133162,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":2,"claim_statuses":["recall_triggered"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["recalled"],"locations":["India, Tirupati"],"accepted_triplet_count":7,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"Tirupati: In a shocking exposure, the ongoing CBI-led SIT investigation, has revealed that the four containers of ghee stocks adulterated with animal fat allegedly supplied by Tamil Nadu-based AR dairy and subsequently...","search_text":"$c3"},{"article_id":"f24f8cd0-0ca1-49cf-8cf1-4a5e6b938fe3","slug":"ghee-f24f8cd0-0ca1-49cf-8cf1-4a5e6b938fe3","title":"Tirupati Laddu Scam: 'Never procured a drop of milk' How Uttarakhand dairy duped Tirupati trust for 5 years with 68 lakh kg fake ghee | Hyderabad News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-11-10","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/hyderabad/sit-exposes-how-dairy-supplied-68-lakh-kg-of-spurious-ghee-to-ttd-for-five-yrs/articleshow/125207993.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.4052417,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["mono glycerides"],"actions":["arrest"],"locations":["Bhagawanpur, Uttarakhand, India"],"primary_state":"Uttarakhand","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":14,"excerpt":"TIRUPATI: The CBI-led special investigation team probing the Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration case has stumbled upon some shocking details following the arrest of A-16, Ajay Kumar Sugandh, who supplied various chemicals...","search_text":"$c4"},{"article_id":"e06bafea-36a4-40ac-8e47-2a2619fd46fd","slug":"ghee-e06bafea-36a4-40ac-8e47-2a2619fd46fd","title":"Tirupati laddu row: How dairy supplied fake ghee worth  ₹250 crore to temple trust","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2025-11-10","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/india-news/tirupati-laddu-row-how-dairy-supplied-fake-ghee-worth-rs-250-cr-to-temple-trust-101762768592798.html","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.39245166,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["animal fat"],"actions":["arrest","blacklist"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":14,"excerpt":"Tirupati laddu row: How dairy supplied fake ghee worth ₹250 crore to temple trust The special investigation team (SIT) led by the CBI gathered these details after the arrest of one of the accused, Ajay Kumar Sugandh. A...","search_text":"$c5"},{"article_id":"ddada193-97b9-4ccc-8a51-bfbea77a0c06","slug":"ghee-ddada193-97b9-4ccc-8a51-bfbea77a0c06","title":"Fake ghee worth ₹250 cr used in Tirupati laddus for 5 yrs: SIT","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-11-10","url":"https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/india/fake-ghee-worth-250-cr-used-in-tirupati-laddus-for-5-yrs-sit/articleshow/125231147.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.66118403,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["acetic acid ester","ghee flavour"],"actions":["investigation","arrest","blacklisting"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"A year after the SC appointed a CBI-led SIT to investigate whether adulterated ghee had been used to prepare Tirupati laddus, the investigation has revealed that between 2019 and 2024, an Uttarakhand-based dairy...","search_text":"$c6"},{"article_id":"d6f9dd1e-cee9-48ff-a7e7-71d7a7b8f61d","slug":"ghee-d6f9dd1e-cee9-48ff-a7e7-71d7a7b8f61d","title":"How dairy duped Tirupati trust for 5 years with 68 lakh kg fake ghee | India News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-11-10","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/how-dairy-duped-tirupati-trust-for-5-years-with-68-lakh-kg-fake-ghee/articleshow/125211860.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.45934578,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal fat"],"actions":["CBI probe"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":10,"excerpt":"TIRUPATI: The dairy in Uttarakhand never procured a drop of milk or butter from anywhere, yet managed to supply 68 lakh kg of ghee worth Rs 250 crore to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD), which runs the famous...","search_text":"$c7"},{"article_id":"c2875090-e4c1-4cec-be8a-7218c8774f6b","slug":"ghee-c2875090-e4c1-4cec-be8a-7218c8774f6b","title":"SIT Reveals Widespread Ghee Adulteration At Tirumala Temple With Fake Supplies Worth Rs 250 Crore From Bhole Baba Dairy","source":"swarajyamag.com","date":"2025-11-10","url":"https://swarajyamag.com/news-brief/sit-reveals-widespread-ghee-adulteration-at-tirumala-temple-with-fake-supplies-worth-rs-250-crore-from-bhole-baba-dairy","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.5888094,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["spurious ghee"],"actions":["arrest","blacklisting"],"locations":["Tirumala, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":8,"excerpt":"The Special Investigation Team (SIT) investigating the large-scale ghee adulteration scandal at the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) has discovered that the temple trust received adulterated ghee supplies for more...","search_text":"$c8"},{"article_id":"c0981bc0-6d81-46d5-a2fc-715c6a5662b8","slug":"ghee-c0981bc0-6d81-46d5-a2fc-715c6a5662b8","title":"Tirupati Laddus scam: How a ‘milkless dairy’ supplied ₹250-cr fake ghee for sacred prasadam","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-11-10","url":"https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/india/tirupati-laddus-scam-how-a-milkless-dairy-supplied-250-cr-fake-ghee-for-sacred-prasadam/articleshow/125220234.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.48800756,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal fat"],"actions":["investigation","blacklisting"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) has revealed startling details in its probe into the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) laddu ghee adulteration case, uncovering that an Uttarakhand-based dairy, which never...","search_text":"$c9"},{"article_id":"835cbabf-d424-4f04-89cb-1d8c0b08f1ab","slug":"ghee-835cbabf-d424-4f04-89cb-1d8c0b08f1ab","title":"How Rs 250 crore fake ghee ended up in Tirupati Temple’s sacred laddus: Explained","source":"opindia.com","date":"2025-11-10","url":"https://www.opindia.com/2025/11/how-fake-ghee-worth-rs-250-crore-found-its-way-into-tirupati-temples-sacred-laddus-explained/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.61626428,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["animal fat","beef tallow","foreign fats"],"actions":["arrest","investigation"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":8,"excerpt":"In a scandal that has stunned devotees, investigators have found that fake ghee worth Rs 250 crore was allegedly supplied to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD), the trust managing the revered Tirupati temple,...","search_text":"$ca"},{"article_id":"73369c4a-c44b-4b7a-b3cc-07766ccb4e2a","slug":"ghee-73369c4a-c44b-4b7a-b3cc-07766ccb4e2a","title":"Rs 250-crore adulterated ghee sent to make Tirupati temple laddus from 2019 to 2024: SIT","source":"indianexpress.com","date":"2025-11-10","url":"https://indianexpress.com/article/cities/hyderabad/tirupati-temple-laddus-adulterated-ghee-sit-10357099/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.27029262,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["Beta-Carotene","ghee flavor","animal fat"],"actions":["arrests","investigation"],"locations":["Tirupati, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":10,"excerpt":"Rs 250-crore adulterated ghee sent to make Tirupati temple laddus from 2019 to 2024: SIT The tradition of the laddu prasadam of Lord Venkateswara is now more than 300 years old. The temple at Tirupati started offering...","search_text":"$cb"},{"article_id":"5374dadc-cd7f-41df-b8d9-8ef7c10ec693","slug":"ghee-5374dadc-cd7f-41df-b8d9-8ef7c10ec693","title":"Tirupati Temple Laddu Scam: Rs 250 Crore Worth Of Adulterated Ghee Fed To Devotees Over 5 years","source":"newsx.com","date":"2025-11-10","url":"https://www.newsx.com/regionals/tirupati-temple-laddu-scam-rs-250-crore-worth-of-adulterated-ghee-fed-to-devotees-over-5-years-108230/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"provisional","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.53367931,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":3,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["supplied approximately 68 lakh kilograms of ghee","Bhole Baba Organic Dairy was blacklisted by TTD in 2022 following complaints of irregularities","TTD rejected four tankers of ghee after laboratory tests confirmed adulteration"],"locations":["India, Tirupati"],"accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":12,"excerpt":"A massive food adulteration scam has rocked the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD), the trust that manages the world-renowned Tirupati temple. A CBI-led Special Investigation Team (SIT) has uncovered that adulterated...","search_text":"$cc"},{"article_id":"3cdd0ffb-841b-4883-9b1a-df7b28022554","slug":"ghee-3cdd0ffb-841b-4883-9b1a-df7b28022554","title":"Adulterated Ghee worth Rs.250 Cr Supplied to TTD for Preparing Laddus","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2025-11-10","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/andhra-pradesh/adulterated-ghee-worth-rs250-cr-supplied-to-ttd-for-preparing-laddus-1916067","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.37318593,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["chemicals"],"actions":["arrest"],"locations":["Tirumala, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"The investigators found that Sugandh supplied ghee through another agency for preparing laddu prasadam in Tirumala in Andhra Pradesh Hyderabad: The ongoing probe by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) in...","search_text":"$cd"},{"article_id":"21fb2b00-9b86-4924-9a0d-248f976cfd93","slug":"ghee-21fb2b00-9b86-4924-9a0d-248f976cfd93","title":"Tirupati Laddu Scam: SIT Arrests Delhi Trader For Supplying Chemicals Used In Fake Ghee","source":"newsx.com","date":"2025-11-10","url":"https://www.newsx.com/regionals/tirupati-laddu-scam-sit-arrests-delhi-trader-for-supplying-chemicals-used-in-fake-ghee-108361/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.53456565,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["acetic acid","palm oil"],"actions":["arrest","judicial custody"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":12,"excerpt":"The Special Investigation Team (SIT) probing the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) laddu ghee adulteration scandal has arrested Delhi-based trader Ajay Kumar Sugandha, a key link in the fake ghee supply chain. Ajay...","search_text":"$ce"},{"article_id":"0d14295d-a954-4163-8974-ecb51bd464e8","slug":"ghee-0d14295d-a954-4163-8974-ecb51bd464e8","title":"SIT exposes how Bhole Baba dairy outwitted Tirupati trust, supplied 68 lakh kgs of spurious ghee for five yrs | Vijayawada News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-11-10","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/vijayawada/sit-exposes-how-bhole-baba-dairy-outwitted-tirupati-trust-supplied-68-lakh-kgs-of-spurious-ghee-for-five-yrs/articleshow/125205772.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.5171512,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["palm oil","palm kernel oil","mono glycerides","acetic acid ester","lactic acid","beta carotene","artificial ghee essence"],"actions":["arrest","disqualification","blacklisting"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":10,"excerpt":"Tirupati: The CBI-led special investigation team probing the Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration case has stumbled upon some shocking details following the arrest of A-16, Ajay Kumar Sugandh, who supplied various chemicals...","search_text":"$cf"},{"article_id":"7a59b547-cf09-4b46-bbfe-d7a7f34b7cfc","slug":"ghee-7a59b547-cf09-4b46-bbfe-d7a7f34b7cfc","title":"CBI’s SIT finds TTD received adulterated ghee for over five years","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2025-11-09","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/andhra-pradesh/cbis-sit-finds-ttd-received-adulterated-ghee-for-over-five-years/article70259867.ece","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"provisional","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.56215345,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["investigation"],"locations":["India, Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD)"],"accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":8,"excerpt":"T The Special Investigation Team (SIT) probing the ghee adulteration case under the supervision of the CBI has found that the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) received supplies of adulterated ghee for over five...","search_text":"$d0"},{"article_id":"51a534c1-9193-4b8c-bbd2-b4e368930ead","slug":"ghee-51a534c1-9193-4b8c-bbd2-b4e368930ead","title":"YV Subba Reddy’s role found to be suspicious in TTD ghee adulteration case: SIT","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2025-11-09","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/andhra-pradesh/2025/Nov/09/yv-subba-reddys-role-found-to-be-suspicious-in-ttd-ghee-adulteration-case-sit","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"provisional","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.34348348,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["lab_confirmed"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["samples sent to CFTRI lab for testing"],"locations":["India, Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD)"],"accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"VIJAYAWADA: The Special Investigation Team (SIT) constituted by the Supreme Court under the supervision of the CBI Director General, has informed the AP High Court that the role of former TTD chairman and YSRCP Rajya...","search_text":"$d1"},{"article_id":"164f43df-a069-4197-9854-e7bd9fc78fae","slug":"ghee-164f43df-a069-4197-9854-e7bd9fc78fae","title":"Adulterated Ghee Made with Animal Fat Seized in Pithapuram","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2025-11-06","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/andhra-pradesh/adulterated-ghee-made-with-animal-fat-seized-in-pithapuram-1915349","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal fat"],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Pithapuram, West Godavari, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":0,"excerpt":"Municipal official Prabhakara Rao, revenue inspector Venkatesh, and other staff participated in the operation. Kakinada: Revenue, municipal and police officials jointly seized 21 cans of adulterated ghee allegedly made...","search_text":"$d2"},{"article_id":"f9720bd0-18fb-4774-96e6-eca25490f73e","slug":"ghee-f9720bd0-18fb-4774-96e6-eca25490f73e","title":"Indore News: Food Officials Seized 600 Liters Of Adulterated Ghee, Oil","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2025-10-30","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/indore/indore-news-food-officials-seized-600-liters-of-adulterated-ghee-oil","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"provisional","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.80041375,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Indore (, Madhya Pradesh, India, Indore (Madhya Pradesh)"],"primary_state":"Madhya Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":11,"excerpt":"Indore (Madhya Pradesh): Food and Drug Administration officials carried out another major action on second day of their ongoing drive and seized a large quantity of adulterated ghee and oil from a manufacturing unit in...","search_text":"$d3"},{"article_id":"e2f38cc3-06ff-4db2-8aad-a537c1e1d0c8","slug":"ghee-e2f38cc3-06ff-4db2-8aad-a537c1e1d0c8","title":"TTD ghee adulteration case: SIT arrests close aide of former Chairman Y.V. Subba Reddy","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2025-10-30","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/andhra-pradesh/ttd-ghee-adulteration-case-sit-arrests-close-aide-of-former-chairman-yv-subba-reddy/article70220944.ece","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.46123503,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["vegetable fats","Vanaspati"],"actions":["arrest","judicial remand"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"T The Special Investigation Team (SIT) probing the alleged ghee adulteration case has arrested Chinna Appanna, a close aide and former personal assistant of TTD’s former Trust Board Chairman and Rajya Sabha member Y.V....","search_text":"$d4"},{"article_id":"71196507-ad87-406f-a4df-edc8a14b1575","slug":"ghee-71196507-ad87-406f-a4df-edc8a14b1575","title":"Tirupati Laddu ghee adulteration case: CBI led SIT arrests former TTD chairman YV Subba Reddyâ_x0080__x0099_s close aide Chinna Appanna | Vijayawada News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-10-30","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/vijayawada/tirupati-laddu-ghee-adulteration-case-cbi-led-sit-arrests-former-ttd-chairman-yv-subba-reddys-close-aide-chinna-appanna/articleshow/124946575.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.3050181,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["lab_confirmed"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["vegetable fats"],"actions":["arrest","judicial remand"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":5,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"TIRUPATI: The CBI led SIT arrested former TTD chairman and Rajya Sabha MP YV Subba Reddyâs close aide Chinna Appanna in connection with the Tirupati Laddu ghee adulteration case in the late hours on Wednesday. He was...","search_text":"$d5"},{"article_id":"2499d49c-748f-41d8-84d9-eed7a66ad43a","slug":"ghee-2499d49c-748f-41d8-84d9-eed7a66ad43a","title":"SIT Arrests Subba Reddy’s Ex-PA in TTD Adulterated Ghee Case","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2025-10-30","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/andhra-pradesh/sit-arrests-subba-reddys-ex-pa-in-ttd-adulterated-ghee-case-1913681","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.23940016,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["adulterated ghee"],"actions":["arrest","blacklist"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"The case dates back to the period when Subba Reddy chaired the TTD board, during which Bholebaba Dairy, based in Uttarakhand, supplied ghee for the Tirumala laddus. Tirupati: The Special Investigation Team (SIT) on...","search_text":"$d6"},{"article_id":"2d8a95d1-8554-4194-b427-4239c3f9ad5b","slug":"ghee-2d8a95d1-8554-4194-b427-4239c3f9ad5b","title":"Indore News: About 3400 Litres Of Fake Ghee Seized From A Factory","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2025-10-29","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/indore/indore-news-about-3400-litres-of-fake-ghee-seized-from-a-factory","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.84370988,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution","mislabeling"],"adulterants":["palm oil"],"actions":["raid","seizure"],"locations":["Indore, Madhya Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Madhya Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Indore (Madhya Pradesh): The food safety department raided a fake ghee manufacturing unit in the Palda area and seized about 3400 litres of ghee on Wednesday. The officials said that the ghee is adulterated. However,...","search_text":"$d7"},{"article_id":"9368fe71-a18d-4580-8063-8e3f17e6cec9","slug":"ghee-9368fe71-a18d-4580-8063-8e3f17e6cec9","title":"Unsafe to Eat: India’s Chronic Food Adulteration Problem","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2025-10-27","url":"https://frontline.thehindu.com/the-nation/food-adulteration-diwali-crisis-contamination-spices-india-diseases-fssai/article70208651.ece","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.41641007,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee","sweets"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Delhi, India"],"primary_state":"Delhi","accepted_triplet_count":6,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":13,"excerpt":"Every year, in the lead-up to the annual festive season of Navratri, followed by Diwali, headlines fixate on the plummeting air quality index. Yet, they are invariably accompanied by reports that portend something far...","search_text":"$d8"},{"article_id":"c6dcef79-69bf-47eb-a0b5-7b4d6bef00fc","slug":"ghee-c6dcef79-69bf-47eb-a0b5-7b4d6bef00fc","title":"60 kg of sweets seized in food safety raids across Telangana","source":"siasat.com","date":"2025-10-19","url":"https://www.siasat.com/60-kg-of-sweets-seized-in-food-safety-raids-across-telangana-3284945/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"provisional","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.26643096,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Hyderabad: Over 60 kg of sweets and 40 kg of bread, and other adulterated food products were seized in food safety raids at sweet manufacturing units and retailers across Telangana. Officials inspected a total of 95...","search_text":"$d9"},{"article_id":"9849e210-d94b-448b-885e-7bdffe11cfe9","slug":"ghee-9849e210-d94b-448b-885e-7bdffe11cfe9","title":"Police seize over 6,800 units of fake desi ghee, sweets across Delhi","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2025-10-18","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/cities/delhi/2025/Oct/18/police-seize-over-6800-units-of-fake-desi-ghee-sweets-across-delhi","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"provisional","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.79189048,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","arrest"],"locations":["Mustafabad, Delhi, India, Budh Vihar, Vijay Vihar, Shiv Vihar, Karawal Nagar, Mustafabad, Delhi"],"primary_state":"Delhi","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":13,"excerpt":"NEW DELHI: In a major crackdown against food adulteration ahead of the festive season, Delhi Police has recovered over 6,800 units of adulterated desi ghee and sweets, arresting 25 individuals in six separate raids...","search_text":"$da"},{"article_id":"6f00035b-1437-428d-895c-a234866e29e0","slug":"ghee-6f00035b-1437-428d-895c-a234866e29e0","title":"FDA seizes adulterated ghee & oil stocks worth Rs 5.5 lakh in pre-Diwali crackdown | Kolhapur News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-10-18","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/kolhapur/fda-seizes-adulterated-ghee-oil-stocks-worth-rs-5-5-lakh-in-pre-diwali-crackdown/articleshow/124643811.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["ghee","edible oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Kolhapur, Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":0,"excerpt":"Kolhapur: Food and Drug Administration (FDA) officials conducted inspections at six locations across the city and district, seizing suspicious stocks of edible oil and ghee worth Rs 5.5 lakh, in a pre-Diwali crackdown....","search_text":"$db"},{"article_id":"oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","slug":"oil-69a4843e2e016e1e","title":"Adulterated paneer and cooking oil seized ahead of Diwali | Agra News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-10-15","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/agra/adulterated-paneer-and-cooking-oil-seized-ahead-of-diwali/articleshow/124586909.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.6272369234416718,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil","mustard oil","refined soybean oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","unsafe_food"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","closure","notice"],"locations":["Agra, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Agra:Ahead of Diwali, officials have stepped up efforts to curb food adulteration. The Food Safety and Drug Administration (FSDA) carried out swift operations across districts to ensure that residents receive safe and...","search_text":"$dc"},{"article_id":"oil-c2fa50179af284f7","slug":"oil-c2fa50179af284f7","title":"Flies hovering on them, 145kg rasgullas destroyed by food safety officials in Noida","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-10-12","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/noida/flies-hovering-on-them-145kg-rasgullas-destroyed-by-food-safety-officials-in-noida/articleshow/124489677.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["mustard oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Noida, Gautam Buddha Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"Noida: Food safety officials destroyed over 430kg of contaminated sweets and seized over 365kg of adulterated oil in the past two days during the inspections. On Saturday, a team raided a manufacturing unit in Devla,...","search_text":"$dd"},{"article_id":"oil-daf4ca29b4849989","slug":"oil-daf4ca29b4849989","title":"Adulterated edible oil worth Rs53L seized in Kanpur raid | Kanpur News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-10-11","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/kanpur/adulterated-edible-oil-worth-rs53l-seized-in-kanpur-raid/articleshow/124465364.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.9432970113934098,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":["suspicious samples"],"actions":["raid","seizure"],"locations":["Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"Kanpur: The Food Safety and Drug Administration (FSDA) carried out a major raid on Friday at M/s Gayatri Oil Industry in Fazalganj, seizing approximately 35,727 litres of edible oil worth Rs53 lakh after the Food Safety...","search_text":"$de"},{"article_id":"oil-c72d68cafd2478be","slug":"oil-c72d68cafd2478be","title":"FSDA seizes substandard supply of edible oil worth 30L | Kanpur News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-10-10","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/kanpur/fsda-seizes-substandard-supply-of-edible-oil-worth-30l/articleshow/124437838.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.9652111641380194,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Kanpur: The Food Safety and Drug Administration Department (FSDA) on Thursday seized a large consignment of edible oil of substandard quality and other food items during a citywide inspection drive. According to...","search_text":"$df"},{"article_id":"oil-081117bbf714a215","slug":"oil-081117bbf714a215","title":"Pre-Diwali crackdown on food adulteration in Lucknow","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2025-10-10","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/cities/lucknow-news/prediwali-crackdown-on-food-adulteration-in-lucknow-101760112550766.html","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["mustard oil","edible oils"],"issue_types":["substandard","adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Pre-Diwali crackdown on food adulteration in Lucknow Suspicious food products worth ₹6.65 lakh seized, 1,552 kg items valued at ₹2.51 lakh destroyed by Food Safety and Drug Administration LUCKNOW Ahead of Diwali and...","search_text":"$e0"},{"article_id":"oil-23d97461886d2622","slug":"oil-23d97461886d2622","title":"FDA seizes untested soyabean oil","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-10-09","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/nagpur/fda-seizes-untested-soyabean-oil/articleshow/124398090.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":2,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["soyabean oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","unsafe_food"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Nagpur, Maharashtra, India","Gondia, Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Nagpur: With Diwali's festive fervour around the corner, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has launched a crackdown in and around Nagpur on shops selling refined soyabean oil without the mandatory laboratory setup...","search_text":"$e1"},{"article_id":"d301dc8a-7194-46ad-bf04-43efdc78c053","slug":"ghee-d301dc8a-7194-46ad-bf04-43efdc78c053","title":"Fake ghee racket busted by Delhi Police ahead of Diwali, 2 arrested from Budh Vihar and Jind","source":"indianexpress.com","date":"2025-10-09","url":"https://indianexpress.com/article/cities/delhi/fake-ghee-racket-busted-diwali-2-arrested-10296351/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.96113192,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit"],"adulterants":["low-grade vanaspati ghee","refined oil","flavouring agents","synthetic colours","unsafe substances"],"actions":["raids","arrests","seizure","facility sealed"],"locations":["Budh Vihar, Jind, North West Delhi, Jind, Delhi, Haryana, India"],"primary_state":"Delhi, Haryana","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":8,"excerpt":"The Delhi Police Tuesday busted a large-scale adulterated ghee manufacturing racket, seizing 2,651 litres of spurious ghee and arresting two manufacturers following raids in the capital and neighbouring Haryana. Acting...","search_text":"$e2"},{"article_id":"4d7063c6-5201-4ce1-89ed-75ee21d51b98","slug":"ghee-4d7063c6-5201-4ce1-89ed-75ee21d51b98","title":"Adulterated ghee seized, 2 held in outer Delhi’s Budh Vihar","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2025-10-09","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/cities/delhi-news/adulterated-ghee-seized-2-held-in-outer-delhi-s-budh-vihar-101759968831171.html","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution","mislabeling"],"adulterants":["refined oil","vanaspati ghee","chemical-based flavoring agents","synthetic color"],"actions":["seizure","arrest"],"locations":["Budh Vihar, outer Delhi, Delhi, India"],"primary_state":"Delhi","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":11,"excerpt":"Adulterated ghee seized, 2 held in outer Delhi’s Budh Vihar The accused disclosed that they used to buy low quality dalda (vanaspati ghee) and refined oil in bulk, which were heated and mixed to produce adulterated desi...","search_text":"$e3"},{"article_id":"a3aeeb23-ea47-454e-9079-05e2142e157d","slug":"ghee-a3aeeb23-ea47-454e-9079-05e2142e157d","title":"Delhi police bust counterfeit oil and ghee manufacturing units | Delhi News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-10-08","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/delhi/delhi-police-bust-counterfeit-oil-and-ghee-manufacturing-units/articleshow/124390886.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit"],"adulterants":["vanaspati ghee","refined oil","chemicals","synthetic colours"],"actions":["arrest","seizure","sealing of unit"],"locations":["Delhi, Rohini, India"],"primary_state":"Delhi","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"New Delhi: A racket which was manufacturing and supplying spurious ghee ahead of the festive season has been busted. A total of 2,651 litres of ghee packed under the names of reputed brands have been seized. A raid was...","search_text":"$e4"},{"article_id":"c6b3635d-7479-4594-9803-195c9d36f4a1","slug":"ghee-c6b3635d-7479-4594-9803-195c9d36f4a1","title":"Festive season taste spoled: Repeat offenders held in Ludhianaâ_x0080__x0099_s ghee sting. | Ludhiana News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-10-07","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/ludhiana/festive-season-taste-spoled-repeat-offenders-held-in-ludhianas-ghee-sting-/articleshow/124348026.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":["adulterated ingredients"],"actions":["raid","seizure","custody"],"locations":["Ludhiana, Punjab, India"],"primary_state":"Punjab","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"Ludhiana: Food safety authorities in this city have seized about 50 kg of alleged adulterated desi ghee and raw materials following a major raid on a house operating as an illicit production unit. The raid, conducted on...","search_text":"$e5"},{"article_id":"96621df7-0c9b-41e5-a5a6-3f21a24613d5","slug":"ghee-96621df7-0c9b-41e5-a5a6-3f21a24613d5","title":"Food safety department seizes adulterated paneer in Haridwar | Dehradun News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-10-07","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/dehradun/food-safety-department-seizes-adulterated-paneer-in-haridwar/articleshow/124369011.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.30751692,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["unspecified"],"actions":["seizure","sample collection"],"locations":["Rishikesh, Uttarakhand, India"],"primary_state":"Uttarakhand","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Haridwar:The food safety department on Tuesday seized 1.5 quintals of adulterated paneer being transported from Saharanpur in Haridwar's Bhagwanpur. The paneer was and was meant to be supplied in Haridwar and Dehradun....","search_text":"$e6"},{"article_id":"336a89c4-d98a-4242-8803-4d479689bc4d","slug":"ghee-336a89c4-d98a-4242-8803-4d479689bc4d","title":"Ludhiana: 50-kg adulterated ghee seized","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2025-10-07","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/cities/chandigarh-news/ludhiana-50-kg-adulterated-ghee-seized-officials-101759775860326.html","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"provisional","validation_confidence":null,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["India, Sham Nagar area, Ludhiana"],"accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":10,"excerpt":"Ludhiana: 50-kg adulterated ghee seized Preliminary inquiry revealed that the individuals involved had previously been engaged in similar illegal activities of preparing adulterated food products, say health officials...","search_text":"$e7"},{"article_id":"9c74f902-2ef0-4269-b436-acc19aa11ea5","slug":"ghee-9c74f902-2ef0-4269-b436-acc19aa11ea5","title":"Ahead of Diwali, 10,000kg of spurious ghee seized | Surat News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-10-05","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/surat/ahead-of-diwali-10000kg-of-spurious-ghee-seized/articleshow/124310125.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit"],"adulterants":["vegetable oil","chemicals","palm oil","vegetable fats"],"actions":["seizure","arrest","destruction"],"locations":["Surat, Gujarat, India"],"primary_state":"Gujarat","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":8,"excerpt":"Surat: Ahead of Diwali, city police dismantled a large-scale operation producing and distributing counterfeit ghee, arresting four people and seizing nearly 9,919kg of fake ghee, worth Rs 53 lakh. The total estimated...","search_text":"$e8"},{"article_id":"1b74e29d-f583-4ee4-96bc-e93553c915b3","slug":"ghee-1b74e29d-f583-4ee4-96bc-e93553c915b3","title":"Delhi police bust three illegal manufacturing units of adulterated ghee; six held","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2025-10-02","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/cities/delhi/2025/Oct/02/delhi-police-bust-three-illegal-manufacturing-units-of-adulterated-ghee-six-held","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"provisional","validation_confidence":null,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["recall_triggered"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Delhi, India"],"primary_state":"Delhi","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"NEW DELHI: In a major crackdown ahead of the festive season, the Delhi Police has busted three illegal manufacturing units of adulterated desi ghee operating in northeast Delhi and arrested six people. Acting on a...","search_text":"$e9"},{"article_id":"oil-9f582ea75e0eddfb","slug":"oil-9f582ea75e0eddfb","title":"Raids at 8 shops in Gurgaon, 16 food samples seized, sent for tests","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-09-29","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/gurgaon/raids-at-8-shops-in-gurgaon-16-food-samples-seized-sent-for-tests/articleshow/124199612.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["mustard oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["raids","seizure"],"locations":["Gurgaon, Haryana, India"],"primary_state":"Haryana","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Gurgaon: Amid ongoing Navratri celebrations, the food safety department conducted raids at eight shops, seizing 16 food samples due to safety concerns related to fasting items such as kuttu atta, singhara atta,...","search_text":"$ea"},{"article_id":"292b562c-132b-47cc-9030-d2544e801e7e","slug":"ghee-292b562c-132b-47cc-9030-d2544e801e7e","title":"223kg of spurious ghee seized | Ahmedabad News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-09-26","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/ahmedabad/223kg-of-spurious-ghee-seized/articleshow/124130383.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8591113,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["unknown"],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India"],"primary_state":"Gujarat","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Ahmedabad: Acting on a tip-off, Ahmedabad Rural policeseized 222.3 kg of suspected adulterated ghee from a warehouse in Vibrant Mega Industrial Park, near Vehelal village, Kanbha police station area. The stock is valued...","search_text":"223kg of spurious ghee seized | Ahmedabad News - The Times of India indiatimes.com Ahmedabad: Acting on a tip-off, Ahmedabad Rural policeseized 222.3 kg of suspected adulterated ghee from a warehouse in Vibrant Mega Industrial Park, near Vehelal village, Kanbha police station area. \nThe stock is valued at Rs 1.56 lakh. Samples have been sent for testing. In a separate action, 543kg of adulterated ghee worth Rs 3.43 lakh was destroyed. \nIn this case, officials are verifying the source and distribution network. TNN ghee adulteration unknown seizure suspected Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India suspected adulterated ghee seizure fflo:foundAtStep warehouse seized 222.3 kg of suspected adulterated ghee from a warehouse Seizure of suspected adulterated ghee fflo:foundAtStep Storage seized 222.3 kg of suspected adulterated ghee from a warehouse ghee fflo:hasAdulterant unknown adulterant suspected adulterated ghee ghee fflo:hasAdulterant unknown adulterant 543kg of adulterated ghee"},{"article_id":"oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","slug":"oil-4868fc6b9046a8f9","title":"14 students of a government school in Hazaribag take ill after consuming snacks , hospitalized","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-09-24","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/ranchi/14-students-of-a-government-school-in-hazaribag-take-ill-after-consuming-snacks-hospitalized/articleshow/124097235.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["mustard oil"],"issue_types":["contamination","substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["inspection","sample_collection"],"locations":["Hazaribag, Jharkhand, India"],"primary_state":"Jharkhand","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Hazaribag: Fourteen students of Kasturba Gandhi Balika Uchch Vidyalaya fell ill after allegedly consuming contaminated roasted flattened rice during evening snacks on Tuesday. All of them were admitted to the Barhi...","search_text":"$eb"},{"article_id":"c6e1c64f-1094-4a24-9d3e-8103fb4d94ab","slug":"ghee-c6e1c64f-1094-4a24-9d3e-8103fb4d94ab","title":"Spurious ghee seized, stale paneer destroyed | Jaipur News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-09-24","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/jaipur/spurious-ghee-seized-stale-paneer-destroyed/articleshow/124077867.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.66839081,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit"],"adulterants":["spurious ghee"],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Jaipur, Rajasthan, India"],"primary_state":"Rajasthan","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Jaipur: Health department's food safety officers seized 884 litre of spurious ghee labelled as Saras, Krishna, Lotus and Goras brands in the city Tuesday. They also seized a pick-up truck transporting paneer and...","search_text":"$ec"},{"article_id":"46441742-607f-484f-80fe-b1334048144a","slug":"ghee-46441742-607f-484f-80fe-b1334048144a","title":"Ranchi District Boosts Food Safety Measures Ahead of Durga Puja with Raids on Sweet Shops | Ranchi News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-09-24","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/ranchi/ranchi-district-boosts-food-safety-measures-ahead-of-durga-puja-with-raids-on-sweet-shops/articleshow/124097658.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.5223467,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["ghee","vanaspati"],"issue_types":["adulteration","unsafe_food"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","shut down"],"locations":["Ranchi, Jharkhand, India"],"primary_state":"Jharkhand","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Ranchi: With Durga Puja around the corner, the Ranchi district administration has intensified food safety drives across the city to curb adulteration and ensure hygienic practices in sweet shops and food units. Over the...","search_text":"$ed"},{"article_id":"1931e9b4-edf1-42ec-a9c4-00ff0cbcff9a","slug":"ghee-1931e9b4-edf1-42ec-a9c4-00ff0cbcff9a","title":"Food safety department seizes 42 kg of adulterated ghee in Ranchi ahead of Durga Puja | Ranchi News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-09-23","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/ranchi/food-safety-department-seizes-42-kg-of-adulterated-ghee-in-ranchi-ahead-of-durga-puja/articleshow/124075072.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.72492617,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","unsafe_food"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure of 42 kg of suspected adulterated ghee"],"locations":["Ranchi, Jharkhand, India"],"primary_state":"Jharkhand","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Ranchi: The state food safety department seized 42 kg of suspected adulterated ghee during a raid conducted on Tuesday, ahead of the upcoming Durga Puja festivities. Ranchi district food safety officer (FSO) Dr Pawan...","search_text":"$ee"},{"article_id":"c349f006-e1f4-498e-970a-626a724e2231","slug":"ghee-c349f006-e1f4-498e-970a-626a724e2231","title":"FDCA seizes 5.5 tonnes of ‘adulterated ghee’ worth Rs 35 lakh in Banaskantha","source":"indianexpress.com","date":"2025-09-06","url":"https://indianexpress.com/article/cities/ahmedabad/fdca-seizes-5-5-tonnes-of-adulterated-ghee-worth-rs-35-lakh-in-banaskantha-10234495/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.89799685,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["palm oil"],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Banaskantha, Gujarat, India"],"primary_state":"Gujarat","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"The Gujarat Food and Drugs Control Administration (FDCA) on Saturday said it had seized 5.5 tonnes of suspected adulterated ghee, worth Rs 35 lakh, from a Banaskantha-based unit, identified as Shree Sales, on September...","search_text":"$ef"},{"article_id":"oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","slug":"oil-d7067a97a2f5acc2","title":"Onam vigil: five special squads in action to expose low-quality food products","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2025-09-03","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/kerala/onam-vigil-five-special-squads-in-action-to-expose-low-quality-food-products/article70008118.ece","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.92,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["coconut oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution","mislabeling"],"adulterants":["testa oil"],"actions":["Action will be initiated soon"],"locations":["Kozhikode, Kerala, India"],"primary_state":"Kerala","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Strengthening its fight against adulteration and unhygienic practices, the Food Safety department has deployed five special squads with mobile lab testing facilities for aggressive checking during the Onam season in...","search_text":"$f0"},{"article_id":"706f0136-7ae5-45f2-b804-e3a8c9a14d1c","slug":"ghee-706f0136-7ae5-45f2-b804-e3a8c9a14d1c","title":"'Bhandara' Turns Nightmare! 250 Villagers Fall Ill After Eating Halwa Made with Adulterated Ghee in MP's Shivpuri","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2025-09-01","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/bhopal/bhandara-turns-nightmare-250-villagers-fall-ill-after-eating-halwa-made-with-adulterated-ghee-in-mps-shivpuri","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.41214971,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee","halwa"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["adulterated ghee"],"actions":["sample collection","medical treatment"],"locations":["Shivpuri, Madhya Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Madhya Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"Shivpuri (Madhya Pradesh): A religious feast in Madhya Pradesh's Shivpuri turned into a nighmare for the devotees after 250 people fell seriously ill after taking the meal. It is said that the Halwa was prepared in...","search_text":"$f1"},{"article_id":"38d24327-d93d-472b-99ac-246351c7dbfd","slug":"ghee-38d24327-d93d-472b-99ac-246351c7dbfd","title":"FDCA crackdown: 12 tonnes of adulterated ghee worth Rs 81 lakh seized in Gujarat | Ahmedabad News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-09-01","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/ahmedabad/fdca-crackdown-12-tonnes-of-adulterated-ghee-worth-rs-81-lakh-seized-in-gujarat/articleshow/123621079.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"event_count":3,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Gujarat, India","India, Banaskantha"],"primary_state":"Gujarat","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":8,"excerpt":"Ahmedabad: Gujarat's Food and Drugs Control Administration (FDCA) intensified its campaign against ghee adulteration, seizing over 12 tonnes of suspect ghee worth Rs 81 lakh during raids across multiple districts in...","search_text":"$f2"},{"article_id":"3d6b98eb-c79e-460c-883b-9c997ffea009","slug":"ghee-3d6b98eb-c79e-460c-883b-9c997ffea009","title":"A spoonful of policy change: Why a lower tax slab for ghee under GST 2.0 is good for hearts, homes, and farmers","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-08-28","url":"https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/small-biz/gst/a-spoonful-of-policy-change-why-a-lower-tax-slab-for-ghee-under-gst-2-0-is-good-for-hearts-homes-and-farmers/articleshow/123557125.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.31280516,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["palm oil","adulterated variants"],"actions":[],"locations":["India"],"accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"India needs to recognise a simple yet crucial truth about its diets, asserts Dr Sachin Shah, Director of Neonatal and Paediatric Intensive Care Services at Surya Hospitals in Pune. “Ghee is a healthier staple compared...","search_text":"$f3"},{"article_id":"oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","slug":"oil-9522cb6fbdcc239f","title":"Coconut oil unit sealed in Kanniyakumari for violations","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2025-08-21","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Madurai/coconut-oil-unit-sealed-in-kanniyakumari-for-violations/article69960089.ece","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["coconut oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard","mislabeling"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["sealing of coconut oil unit","seizure"],"locations":["Kanniyakumari, Tamil Nadu, India"],"primary_state":"Tamil Nadu","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"The Kanniyakumari Food Safety Department has sealed a coconut oil manufacturing unit and a retail shop at Palugal village in Vilavancode taluk for absence of valid licence, labelling violations and suspected...","search_text":"$f4"},{"article_id":"caae3943-065a-475a-a6fe-f5706ce3db97","slug":"ghee-caae3943-065a-475a-a6fe-f5706ce3db97","title":"FSSAI suspends AR Dairy’s licence for ghee over adulteration and false information | Today News","source":"livemint.com","date":"2025-08-17","url":"https://www.livemint.com/news/fssai-suspends-ar-dairy-licence-ghee-adulteration-false-information-11755422633259.html","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.39428365,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","mislabeling","unclear"],"adulterants":["ghee from Sri Vyshnavi Dairy Specialties"],"actions":["license suspension"],"locations":["Dindigul, Tamil Nadu, India"],"primary_state":"Tamil Nadu","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":12,"excerpt":"New Delhi: The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) has suspended the license of A.R. Dairy Food Pvt. Ltd, based in Dindigul, Tamil Nadu, for manufacturing, transporting, and selling ghee. The...","search_text":"$f5"},{"article_id":"oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","slug":"oil-8e1bcc090b3c0db2","title":"16k litres of fake coconut oil seized | Thiruvananthapuram News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-08-14","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/thiruvananthapuram/16k-litres-of-fake-coconut-oil-seized/articleshow/123288376.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.912246842110634,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["coconut oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit","mislabeling"],"adulterants":["fake coconut oil"],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Kollam, Kerala, India"],"primary_state":"Kerala","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"T'puram: The state govt seized 16,565 litres of coconut oil of suspicious quality in seven districts after the food safety department conducted surprise inspections of production and marketing centres, said health...","search_text":"$f6"},{"article_id":"oil-a9685f88d15906f6","slug":"oil-a9685f88d15906f6","title":"Food Safety wing seizes 16,565 litres of spurious coconut oil in raids  ","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2025-08-12","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/kerala/food-safety-wing-seizes-16565-litres-of-spurious-coconut-oil-in-raids/article69925354.ece","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.856106898267018,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["coconut oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["seven districts in Kerala, Kerala, India"],"primary_state":"Kerala","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"In surprise raids conducted at coconut oil manufacturing and trading centres in seven districts in Kerala as part of Operation Life, the Food Safety wing seized 16,565 litres of coconut oil, the quality of which was...","search_text":"Food Safety wing seizes 16,565 litres of spurious coconut oil in raids   thehindu.com In surprise raids conducted at coconut oil manufacturing and trading centres in seven districts in Kerala as part of Operation Life, the Food Safety wing seized 16,565 litres of coconut oil, the quality of which was suspect.\nThe surprise raids were conducted by the Food Safety wing following a glut of complaints about substandard coconut oil flooding the market, now that the price of coconut oil in the open market has skyrocketed.\nPublished - August 12, 2025 09:37 pm IST coconut oil substandard adulteration seizure suspected seven districts in Kerala, Kerala, India seizure of 16,565 litres of coconut oil fflo:targets coconut oil Food Safety wing seized 16,565 litres of coconut oil Seizure of suspect coconut oil fflo:foundAtStep Processing raids conducted at coconut oil manufacturing Operation Life fflo:targets coconut oil Operation Life, the Food Safety wing seized"},{"article_id":"58c8e8bf-9cbd-46dd-8a8b-b1b5cbb0d58d","slug":"ghee-58c8e8bf-9cbd-46dd-8a8b-b1b5cbb0d58d","title":"Dalda, refined oil, a dash of artificial essence: How fake ghee was sold under Amul, Mother Dairy brands in UP’s Sambhal","source":"indianexpress.com","date":"2025-08-09","url":"https://indianexpress.com/article/cities/delhi/923-litres-fake-ghee-seized-uttar-pradesh-sambhal-10179095/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"event_count":2,"claim_statuses":["recall_triggered"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seized"],"locations":["India, UP’s Sambhal"],"accepted_triplet_count":7,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Dalda, refined oil, a dash of artificial essence: How fake ghee was sold under Amul, Mother Dairy brands in UP’s Sambhal Police busted the fake ghee manufacturing racket on Friday and arrested five men who have been...","search_text":"$f7"},{"article_id":"oil-ff34df409a4806f1","slug":"oil-ff34df409a4806f1","title":"Coconut oil mills in Kangayam struggle to stem slide in production despite healthy market conditions","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2025-08-07","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Coimbatore/coconut-oil-mills-in-kangayam-struggle-to-stem-slide-in-production-despite-healthy-market-conditions/article69906326.ece","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.6941,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["coconut oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution","dilution"],"adulterants":["sunflower oil","palm oil"],"actions":[],"locations":["Kangayam, Tiruppur, Tamil Nadu, India"],"primary_state":"Tamil Nadu","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"On the face of it, the tidings seem favourable for the nearly 120 coconut mills in Kangayam town of Tiruppur district where oil production capacity ranges from 1,000 tonnes to 1,400 tonnes a day. Wholesale price of...","search_text":"$f8"},{"article_id":"178d6244-50cd-4bea-8e16-f951f6227a8c","slug":"ghee-178d6244-50cd-4bea-8e16-f951f6227a8c","title":"Punjab: Maximum adulteration in ‘paneer’, ‘desi ghee’, says health minister","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2025-08-07","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/cities/chandigarh-news/punjab-maximum-adulteration-in-paneer-desi-ghee-says-health-minister-101754510094173.html","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.32199379,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["recall_triggered"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["adulteration_finding"],"locations":["Punjab, India"],"primary_state":"Punjab","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Punjab: Maximum adulteration in ‘paneer’, ‘desi ghee’, says health minister According to Punjab and family welfare minister Dr Balbir Singh, out of 531 samples of ‘paneer’, 196 samples were found sub-standard and 59...","search_text":"$f9"},{"article_id":"oil-fc714f38909e4348","slug":"oil-fc714f38909e4348","title":"Dry fruit oil traders under scanner ahead of Rakshabandhan","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-08-05","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/noida/dry-fruit-oil-traders-under-scanner-ahead-of-rakshabandhan/articleshow/123103360.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"event_count":2,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["rice bran oil","soybean oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","mislabeling"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Greater Noida, Gautam Buddha Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, India","Noida, Gautam Buddha Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Noida: District food safety teams seized over 340 kg of food items suspected to be unsafe during inspections across Noida, Greater Noida, and Dadri, as part of a crackdown ahead of the Rakshabandhan festival on Aug 9....","search_text":"$fa"},{"article_id":"oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","slug":"oil-17abc10a59ca2c80","title":"Court fines 2 for selling adulterated mustard oil in Ghaziabad | Noida News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-07-26","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/noida/court-fines-2-for-selling-adulterated-mustard-oil-in-ghaziabad/articleshow/122912688.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.7923283444275631,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["unclear"],"food_items":["mustard oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","unsafe_food"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["fine of Rs 20,000 each under Section 51 of the FSSA","fine of Rs 5,000 each under Section 59 (i) of the Act"],"locations":["Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Ghaziabad: The Court of Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate (ACJM) in Ghaziabad sentenced two individuals till the rise of the court and imposed a Rs 25,000 fine each for storing and selling substandard mustard oil....","search_text":"$fb"},{"article_id":"oil-8e1ede70f7533502","slug":"oil-8e1ede70f7533502","title":"Coconut oil price skyrockets, crosses Rs 500 per litre","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2025-07-25","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/kerala/2025/Jul/25/coconut-oil-price-skyrockets-crosses-rs-500-per-litre","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.75,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.417,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["coconut oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["unknown"],"actions":[],"locations":["Kochi, Ernakulam, Kerala, India"],"primary_state":"Kerala","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":0,"excerpt":"KOCHI: As Keralites start preparations for Onam celebrations, the rising prices of essentials, especially coconut and coconut oil, are worrying families. The price of coconut oil which hovered around Rs 160 per litre a...","search_text":"$fc"},{"article_id":"oil-70649ae86f99dffc","slug":"oil-70649ae86f99dffc","title":"Maharashtra News: Minister Narhari Zirwal Announces Suspension Of 2 FDA Officials, Closure Of Nandurbar Factory Over Oil Adulteration","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2025-07-07","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/mumbai/maharashtra-news-minister-narhari-zirwal-announces-suspension-of-2-fda-officials-closure-of-nandurbar-factory-over-oil-adulteration","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.6975422954563553,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["soybean oil","groundnut oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["suspension","closure"],"locations":["Akkalkuwa, Nandurbar, Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Mumbai, Jul 7: Maharashtra Food and Civil Supplies Minister Narhari Zirwal on Monday announced immediate suspension of two Food and Drug Administration (FDA) officials and closure of a factory in Nandurbar district...","search_text":"$fd"},{"article_id":"oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","slug":"oil-431077a2a1ab59e9","title":"Substandard edible oil found in Nandurbar: Minister warns of action","source":"indianexpress.com","date":"2025-07-07","url":"https://indianexpress.com/article/cities/mumbai/substandard-edible-oil-found-in-nandurbar-minister-warns-of-action-10112216/","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.9234249919399004,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil","refined soybean oil","groundnut oil"],"issue_types":["substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["Legal action under Food Safety and Standards Act"],"locations":["Nandurbar, Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Several edible oil samples collected in Nandurbar district have failed to meet food safety standards, and action will be taken against the guilty, Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Minister Narhari Zirwal informed the...","search_text":"$fe"},{"article_id":"oil-2027fa14e94958fd","slug":"oil-2027fa14e94958fd","title":"Maharashtra News: Rural Development Minister Jaikumar Gore Announces Suspension Of 2 Engineers Over Irregular Payments","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2025-07-07","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/mumbai/maharashtra-news-rural-development-minister-jaikumar-gore-announces-suspension-of-2-engineers-over-irregular-payments","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.4057576413847123,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["soybean oil","peanut oil"],"issue_types":["substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["suspension","closure"],"locations":["Nandurbar, Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Mumbai, July 7: Maharashtra Rural Development Minister Jaikumar Gore on Monday in the state council announced the suspension of two engineers from public work departments under the jurisdiction of Chhatrapati...","search_text":"$ff"},{"article_id":"0109eea0-3adc-4177-a6f7-e3bc31bf237d","slug":"ghee-0109eea0-3adc-4177-a6f7-e3bc31bf237d","title":"575 litres of adulterated ghee, 7,000 kg of ginger-garlic paste seized in Hyderabad; here’s what it can do to your body","source":"indianexpress.com","date":"2025-07-05","url":"https://indianexpress.com/article/lifestyle/health/adulterated-ghee-ginger-garlic-paste-hyderabad-consume-10107480/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["vanaspati","animal fat","starch","artificial flavourings"],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Hyderabad, LB Nagar, Maheshwaram, Malkajgiri, Bhongir, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":10,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":10,"excerpt":"Food adulteration is at an all-time high, and the latest example has surfaced from Hyderabad, where a crackdown on illegal food manufacturing units has led to alarming discoveries. According to a report by The Hindu,...","search_text":"$100"},{"article_id":"920f5e05-04f9-4545-b26d-ea48a1f18a2f","slug":"ghee-920f5e05-04f9-4545-b26d-ea48a1f18a2f","title":"575 liters of adulterated ghee and 7000 kg of ginger-garlic paste seized in Hyderabad: How to do purity check at home - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-07-04","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/life-style/food-news/575-liters-of-adulterated-ghee-and-7000-kg-of-ginger-garlic-paste-seized-in-hyderabad-how-to-do-a-purity-check-at-home/articleshow/122246421.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.73252362,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["preservatives"],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Hyderabad, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":9,"excerpt":"Food adulteration has become increasingly common, raising serious concerns about public health. Frequently adulterated items in the market include milk, paneer, ghee, ginger-garlic paste, turmeric, and various other...","search_text":"$101"},{"article_id":"d9794536-257f-4a12-8d46-a7c0c649fb97","slug":"ghee-d9794536-257f-4a12-8d46-a7c0c649fb97","title":"Rachakonda food safety raids: 575l of adulterated ghee, over 7000kg of adulterated ginger-garlic paste seized","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2025-07-03","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/telangana/rachakonda-food-safety-raids-575l-of-adulterated-ghee-over-7000kg-of-adulterated-ginger-garlic-paste-seized/article69768075.ece","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.73101288,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["adulterated ghee"],"actions":["seizure","arrest"],"locations":["Hyderabad, Ranga Reddy, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"The Rachakonda Police booked 46 cases and arrested 52 people during a special drive against unauthorised and unhygienic food manufacturing units on July 2. The raids were carried out by Special Operations Teams I and II...","search_text":"$102"},{"article_id":"ea0bba2c-7a56-40f2-afac-00f638b54fc3","slug":"ghee-ea0bba2c-7a56-40f2-afac-00f638b54fc3","title":"Laddu ghee probe: SIT submits status report on investigation to Supreme Court | Vijayawada News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-06-27","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/vijayawada/laddu-ghee-probe-sit-submits-status-report-on-investigation-to-supreme-court/articleshow/122118084.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.23437233,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["chemical-based palm oil derivatives"],"actions":["investigation","arrest"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Tirupati: The special investigation team (SIT), constituted by the Supreme Court to probe the Tirumala laddu adulteration case, is learnt to have submitted a status report on the ongoing investigation to the apex court...","search_text":"$103"},{"article_id":"824601ea-5309-4ddf-bc61-486c992e309c","slug":"ghee-824601ea-5309-4ddf-bc61-486c992e309c","title":"CBI opposes grant of bail to accused in ghee case | Vijayawada News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-06-25","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/vijayawada/cbi-opposes-grant-of-bail-to-accused-in-ghee-case/articleshow/122053276.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["palm oil","chemicals"],"actions":["bail_opposition","charge_sheet_filed"],"locations":["Vijayawada, Krishna, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Vijayawada: Opposing grant of bail to the accused in the ghee adulteration case, the CBI told the high court that adulterated ghee was supplied not only to TTD but also to other temples like Kanipakam, Srikalahasti,...","search_text":"$104"},{"article_id":"2255e304-d6ef-4707-b594-cbc3955019ec","slug":"ghee-2255e304-d6ef-4707-b594-cbc3955019ec","title":"Adulterated ghee supplied to TTD, other temples: CBI","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2025-06-25","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/andhra-pradesh/2025/Jun/25/adulterated-ghee-supplied-to-ttd-other-temples-cbi","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","mislabeling"],"adulterants":["palm oil","chemicals"],"actions":["court_hearing"],"locations":["Vijayawada, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"VIJAYAWADA: The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) on Tuesday informed the Andhra Pradesh High Court that adulterated ghee, misrepresented as cow ghee, was supplied to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD), and...","search_text":"$105"},{"article_id":"oil-a882a3e8b7aeb487","slug":"oil-a882a3e8b7aeb487","title":"Coconut oil prices on the boil as retail price soars to ₹410/litre","source":"thehindubusinessline.com","date":"2025-06-17","url":"https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/economy/agri-business/coconut-oil-prices-on-the-boil-as-retail-price-soars-to-410litre/article69703785.ece","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.4134,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["coconut oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":["inferior and adulterated oils"],"actions":["banning of 42 brands of coconut oil"],"locations":["Kerala, India"],"primary_state":"Kerala","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":0,"excerpt":"Coconut oil prices continue to boil with its retail prices reaching ₹410 per litre, up ₹80 in the past week. Citing declining production of copra as a reason for prices to surge, Thalath Mahmood, president of Cochin Oil...","search_text":"$106"},{"article_id":"394a5ff5-76f3-4885-87ed-4a6879611c22","slug":"ghee-394a5ff5-76f3-4885-87ed-4a6879611c22","title":"â_x0080__x0098_FSSAI is working towards felicitating whistle-blowers who report adulterationâ_x0080__x0099_ | Ranchi News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-06-15","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/ranchi/fssai-is-working-towards-felicitating-whistle-blowers-who-report-adulteration/articleshow/121853932.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.27151167,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["artificial fragrances"],"actions":[],"locations":["Jharkhand, India"],"primary_state":"Jharkhand","accepted_triplet_count":11,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"In-charge of the state food testing laboratory, Chaturbhuj Meena speaks to Shikha Yadav on their efforts to curb adulteration, the role of lab in detecting unsafe food and the required support to make enforcement more...","search_text":"$107"},{"article_id":"301bb818-ff44-4346-9ffe-ad58bf13cfb2","slug":"ghee-301bb818-ff44-4346-9ffe-ad58bf13cfb2","title":"Use of adulterated ghee for preparation raises concerns","source":"thehansindia.com","date":"2025-06-12","url":"https://www.thehansindia.com/andhra-pradesh/use-of-adulterated-ghee-for-preparation-raises-concerns-978984","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.76237897,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["lab_confirmed"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":["low-quality ghee","vanaspati","palm oil"],"actions":["seizure","notices","criminal cases"],"locations":["Rajamahendravaram, East Godavari, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":10,"excerpt":"Rajamahendravaram: The famed Pootharekulu of Atreyapuram, renowned across the country for their unique taste and delicate preparation, has landed in controversy after authorities discovered the use of substandard ghee...","search_text":"$108"},{"article_id":"ac5e071a-48a2-4a53-a1f6-5fc7b6d35280","slug":"ghee-ac5e071a-48a2-4a53-a1f6-5fc7b6d35280","title":"TTD Ghee Case: SIT Likely To Issue Notices To Two Former Officials","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2025-06-06","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/andhra-pradesh/ttd-ghee-case-sit-likely-to-issue-notices-to-two-former-officials-1883619","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.2896931,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["detention","questioning","arrest"],"locations":["Tirupati, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Advertisement TTD ghee case widens: SIT likely to summon ex-officials, Kolkata supplier detained Tirupati: The investigations into the supply of adulterated ghee to TTD would progress as the special investigation team...","search_text":"$109"},{"article_id":"5d222c9b-8733-4d3b-abaa-59f77da35546","slug":"ghee-5d222c9b-8733-4d3b-abaa-59f77da35546","title":"Special investigation team opposes bail for accused in TTD adulterated ghee supply case | Vijayawada News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-06-06","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/vijayawada/special-investigation-team-opposes-bail-for-accused-in-ttd-adulterated-ghee-supply-case/articleshow/121656122.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.39932168,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["palm oil","chemicals"],"actions":["bail opposition"],"locations":["Vijayawada, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Vijayawada: The special investigation team (SIT) probing the Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration controversy strongly opposed the granting of bail to the directors of Bolebaba, Vaishnavi, and AR Dairy in the case...","search_text":"$10a"},{"article_id":"58ac029e-4204-42c4-8ff3-6dbd84dd382a","slug":"ghee-58ac029e-4204-42c4-8ff3-6dbd84dd382a","title":"HC adjourns bail pleas in TTD ghee case to June 17","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2025-06-06","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/andhra-pradesh/2025/Jun/06/hc-adjourns-bail-pleas-in-ttd-ghee-case-to-june-17","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.32052258,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["unspecified"],"actions":["chargesheet_filed","bail_plea_adjourned"],"locations":["Vijayawada, Krishna, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"VIJAYAWADA: The High Court adjourned to June 17 the hearing on bail pleas filed in connection with the supply of adulterated ghee to Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) case. Several accused, including directors of...","search_text":"$10b"},{"article_id":"1b1069d2-3f50-4dd3-a8bd-0aeed6bacf98","slug":"ghee-1b1069d2-3f50-4dd3-a8bd-0aeed6bacf98","title":"Betrayal of devotee faith: SIT opposes bail to accused in Tirupati laddu case","source":"indiatoday.in","date":"2025-06-06","url":"https://www.indiatoday.in/india/andhra-pradesh/story/ttd-tirumala-tirupati-devasthanams-cbi-laddu-ghee-adulteration-fake-devotee-andhra-pradesh-2736980-2025-06-06?utm_source=rss","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.19970285,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["palm oil"],"actions":["bail_opposition"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"Betrayal of devotee faith: SIT opposes bail to accused in Tirupati laddu case The Central Bureau of Investigation opposed bail for directors of dairies accused in the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams laddu ghee...","search_text":"$10c"},{"article_id":"fa1e38b4-4ced-4f4b-9a7b-b1b89ff13da7","slug":"ghee-fa1e38b4-4ced-4f4b-9a7b-b1b89ff13da7","title":"Tirupati laddu ghee row: HC sets aside suspension of licence of dairy firm | Madurai News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-05-17","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/madurai/tirupati-laddu-ghee-row-hc-sets-aside-suspension-of-licence-of-dairy-firm/articleshow/121219045.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.31615781,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["foreign fat"],"actions":["suspension of licence","cost of 2 lakh"],"locations":["Madurai, Dindigul, Tamil Nadu, India"],"primary_state":"Tamil Nadu","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":9,"excerpt":"Madurai: Madras high court on Friday set aside the order passed by the authorities suspending the licence of Dindigul-based A R Dairy Food Private Limited for allegedly supplying ghee with foreign fat for preparing...","search_text":"$10d"},{"article_id":"b78601e1-6600-408f-bc8c-52407a676ecb","slug":"ghee-b78601e1-6600-408f-bc8c-52407a676ecb","title":"Tirupati Laddoo Ghee Row: Madras HC Quashes Suspension Of FSSAI Licence Of Tamil Nadu Dairy Firm","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2025-05-16","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/india/tirupati-laddoo-ghee-row-madras-hc-quashes-suspension-of-fssai-licence-of-tamil-nadu-dairy-firm","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.9,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.34334464,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal fat"],"actions":["suspension of FSSAI licence"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"Chennai: Months after a row over alleged animal fat being found in the ghee used in the preparation of the laddoo prasadam at the famed Tirupati shrine made headlines, the Madras High Court on Friday set aside the...","search_text":"$10e"},{"article_id":"04c00967-a247-4802-b3c2-3f266885c385","slug":"ghee-04c00967-a247-4802-b3c2-3f266885c385","title":"Tirupati laddu row: Madras High Court sets aside suspension of FSSAI licence of Dindigul-based A.R. Dairy Food","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2025-05-16","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/tamil-nadu/tirupati-laddu-row-madras-high-court-sets-aside-suspension-of-fssai-licence-of-dindigul-based-ar-dairy-food/article69582960.ece","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.3120143,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["foreign fat"],"actions":["suspension of FSSAI licence"],"locations":["Dindigul, Tamil Nadu, India"],"primary_state":"Tamil Nadu","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"The Madras High Court on Friday (May 16, 2025) set aside the suspension of the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) licence issued to Dindigul-based A.R. Dairy Food Private Limited for having allegedly...","search_text":"$10f"},{"article_id":"oil-438415c185832786","slug":"oil-438415c185832786","title":"AMC seizes 105 tins of suspicious cooking oil from Behrampura - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-04-26","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/ahmedabad/amc-seizes-105-tins-of-suspicious-cooking-oil-from-behrampura/articleshow/120648762.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.6183954414544142,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["refined palm oil","refined soybean oil"],"issue_types":["substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India"],"primary_state":"Gujarat","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Ahmedabad: On Friday, the health department of the Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation (AMC) conducted a raid at the packaging unit of Milan Oils Pvt Ltd, located near Chandola Lake in the Behrampura area of the city. The...","search_text":"$110"},{"article_id":"620bfde0-ec72-4b52-bfa4-e06ce3b56960","slug":"ghee-620bfde0-ec72-4b52-bfa4-e06ce3b56960","title":"Factory making spurious ghee busted in Chittor, one detained - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-04-23","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/jaipur/factory-making-spurious-ghee-busted-in-chittor-one-detained/articleshow/120529039.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.94484471,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal fat","palm oil","synthetic essence"],"actions":["seizure","detention","case registration"],"locations":["Chittor, Chittorgarh, Rajasthan, India"],"primary_state":"Rajasthan","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Bhilwara: Chittorgarh police Friday seized 1,500 kg of fake desi ghee laced with animal fat, palm oil, and synthetic essenceâan adulteration racket running for over 18 months. The factory operator, Bhairulal Gurjar of...","search_text":"$111"},{"article_id":"oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","slug":"oil-4d6bfb72c0733299","title":"Health dept seizes 352 boxes of refined oil after 6 hospitalised","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2025-04-22","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/cities/chandigarh-news/health-dept-seizes-352-boxes-of-refined-oil-after-6-hospitalised-101745259236048.html","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.3488802283324012,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["refined soyabean oil","Binni refined oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","contamination"],"adulterants":["Vitamin D"],"actions":["confiscation","public announcement"],"locations":["Rajpura, Patiala, Punjab, India"],"primary_state":"Punjab","accepted_triplet_count":6,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":16,"excerpt":"Health dept seizes 352 boxes of refined oil after 6 hospitalised Test results show Vitamin D toxicity in patients who hail from 2 Rajpura villages; according to the communication of the PGIMER, Chandigarh, with the...","search_text":"$112"},{"article_id":"e256486b-ee32-4d0f-9cba-d02bf4bd780a","slug":"ghee-e256486b-ee32-4d0f-9cba-d02bf4bd780a","title":"Tirupati Prasad Case: Four Gwalior Traders Under Investigation By CBI For Supplying Ghee Mixed With Animal Fat","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2025-04-20","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/bhopal/tirupati-prasad-case-four-gwalior-traders-under-investigation-by-cbi-for-supplying-ghee-mixed-with-animal-fat","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.35884666,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee","oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal fat"],"actions":["investigation","questioning"],"locations":["Gwalior, Madhya Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Madhya Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Gwalior (Madhya Pradesh): Four traders from Gwalior have come under the scanner of the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) in connection with the alleged use of animal fat in the prasad served at the famous Tirupati...","search_text":"$113"},{"article_id":"b4a8aa1a-7262-4318-9579-9fff20f959a6","slug":"ghee-b4a8aa1a-7262-4318-9579-9fff20f959a6","title":"1,300kg of cream seized, unit sealed | Ahmedabad News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-03-30","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/ahmedabad/1300kg-of-cream-seized-unit-sealed/articleshow/119723566.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.9,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.54129752,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["cream","vegetable ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["palm oil","vegetable ghee"],"actions":["seizure","unit sealed"],"locations":["Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India"],"primary_state":"Gujarat","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":8,"excerpt":"Ahmedabad: An AMC team on Saturday raided a warehouse-cum-factory, Shivshambhu Dairy Products, on Naroda Road and seized 1,300kg of cream valued at Rs 3.90 lakh. It was suspected that palm oil and vegetable ghee were...","search_text":"$114"},{"article_id":"79cfeedd-0cef-4026-962d-c86d241c4e56","slug":"ghee-79cfeedd-0cef-4026-962d-c86d241c4e56","title":"Fake Ghee: 3,100 kg adulterated ghee seized in Ahmedabad: 7 ways to identify fake ghee at home | - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-03-28","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/life-style/food-news/3100-kg-adulterated-ghee-seized-in-ahmedabad-7-ways-to-identify-fake-ghee-at-home/articleshow/119640035.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["India, Ahmedabad"],"accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":14,"excerpt":"Ghee, also known as clarified butter, is an Ayurveda-approved food item, which is highly valued for its medicinal properties, and is believed to promote digestion, boost immunity, and nourish the skin and hair. But,...","search_text":"$115"},{"article_id":"oil-05aa031a4b58524e","slug":"oil-05aa031a4b58524e","title":"Fake oil found in Bihar, here's how to spot it.","source":"indiatoday.in","date":"2025-03-25","url":"https://www.indiatoday.in/newsmo/video/fake-oil-found-in-bihar-heres-how-to-spot-it-2698982-2025-03-25?utm_source=rss","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.067321759216214,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["counterfeit","substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Rohtas district, Bihar, India"],"primary_state":"Bihar","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":0,"excerpt":"A cordial exchange between Russian President Vladimir Putin and American architect Rodney Cook Jr. at the St. Petersburg International Economic Forum highlighted cultural ties amid broader US-Russia tensions. Speaking...","search_text":"$116"},{"article_id":"oil-f9ab44d774810d93","slug":"oil-f9ab44d774810d93","title":"Crackdown on food adulteration: 112 kg rice bran oil destroyed, substandard sauces seized in Lucknow","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2025-03-12","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/cities/lucknow-news/crackdown-on-food-adulteration-112-kg-rice-bran-oil-destroyed-substandard-sauces-seized-in-lucknow-101741721802362.html","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8627560311883874,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["rice bran oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","unsafe_food"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","destruction"],"locations":["Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":15,"excerpt":"Crackdown on food adulteration: 112 kg rice bran oil destroyed, substandard sauces seized in Lucknow Upon examination, the FSDA team found that the vegetable and soy sauces were adulterated with potato pulp; samples...","search_text":"$117"},{"article_id":"oil-c84820229ce8af05","slug":"oil-c84820229ce8af05","title":"Shop owner held for selling expired edible oils with tampered labels","source":"siasat.com","date":"2025-03-12","url":"https://www.siasat.com/shop-owner-held-for-selling-expired-edible-oils-with-tampered-labels-3193611/","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.6596,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["edible oil","Fresh Heart brand oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","mislabeling","counterfeit"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["arrest","seizure","legal action"],"locations":["Hyderabad, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Hyderabad: A 51-year-old man was arrested by the Hyderabad police and the food safety officials for allegedly repacking and selling expired edible oils with altered labels. The accused has been identified as Ashok Kumar...","search_text":"$118"},{"article_id":"oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","slug":"oil-5847641c3b5b8b8f","title":"Edible oil racket busted, 1 arrested in joint drive","source":"thehansindia.com","date":"2025-03-12","url":"https://www.thehansindia.com/telangana/edible-oil-racket-busted-1-arrested-in-joint-drive-953178","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.4952726051913269,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["mislabeling","substandard","unsafe_food"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["raid","arrest","seizure"],"locations":["Hyderabad, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"Hyderabad: The Hyderabad Commissioner’s Task Force, South-East Team, along with the Food Safety Officials, raided a shop in Mahaboob Mansion, Malakpet, and apprehended a person for repacking and selling edible oils with...","search_text":"$119"},{"article_id":"oil-156fd0980ec51fe6","slug":"oil-156fd0980ec51fe6","title":"Shop owner held for selling expired edible oils with tampered labels in Hyderabad","source":"etemaaddaily.com","date":"2025-03-12","url":"https://www.en.etemaaddaily.com/world/hyderabad/shop-owner-held-for-selling-expired-edible-oils-with-tampered-labels-in-hyderabad:171904","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.3034,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","mislabeling"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["arrest"],"locations":["Hyderabad, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Urdu Matrimonials Classifieds مزید دریافت کریں Geographic Reference City & Local Guides مزید دریافت کریں City & Local Guides Geographic Reference World Business Sports Entertainment Health Crime Edu and Jobs Politics...","search_text":"$11a"},{"article_id":"oil-0536bbfbc5745875","slug":"oil-0536bbfbc5745875","title":"Shop owner arrested for selling expired edible oils","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2025-03-11","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/telangana/shop-owner-arrested-for-selling-expired-edible-oils/article69317546.ece","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.6027,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["edible oil","Fresh Heart brand oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","mislabeling"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["arrest","seizure"],"locations":["Hyderabad, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"A shop owner allegedly repacking and selling expired edible oils with tampered labels was arrested on Tuesday. During the raid, officials seized a total of 1,014 litres of edible oil valued at approximately ₹1.90 lakh....","search_text":"$11b"},{"article_id":"4fa075c9-a30f-47e5-8f09-158017bfd6d6","slug":"ghee-4fa075c9-a30f-47e5-8f09-158017bfd6d6","title":"1.5k kg adulterated ghee seized from Udaipur factory, 2 detained | Jaipur News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-03-09","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/jaipur/1-5k-kg-adulterated-ghee-seized-from-udaipur-factory-2-detained/articleshow/118810567.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit"],"adulterants":["soybean","dalda","essence"],"actions":["raid","seizure","detention"],"locations":["Udaipur, Rajasthan, India"],"primary_state":"Rajasthan","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Udaipur: In a joint action, Udaipur police and DST team conducted raid and busted a factory producing adulterated ghee, packaged under well-known brands such as Saras, Amul and Nova, in Kaladwas RIICO area here Saurday....","search_text":"$11c"},{"article_id":"0d96e6b1-57f6-4555-8711-703a6c818eea","slug":"ghee-0d96e6b1-57f6-4555-8711-703a6c818eea","title":"Cockroaches, hygiene lapses found in Hyderabad restaurant during raids","source":"indiatoday.in","date":"2025-03-08","url":"https://www.indiatoday.in/cities/hyderabad/story/hyderabad-4-seasons-restaurant-raid-food-safety-hygiene-violations-2690857-2025-03-08?utm_source=rss","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.28487977,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["contamination"],"adulterants":["mosquitoes and houseflies"],"actions":["strict actions under relevant provisions of the Food Safety and Standards Act"],"locations":["Jangaon, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Cockroaches, hygiene lapses found in Hyderabad restaurant during raids Food safety officials raided an upscale restaurant Hyderabad, 4 Seasons, over suspicion of hygiene violations in its kitchen. During the raid, the...","search_text":"$11d"},{"article_id":"oil-86a403aef71f924e","slug":"oil-86a403aef71f924e","title":"2,300kg of spurious paneer seized","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-03-06","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/ahmedabad/2300kg-of-spurious-paneer-seized/articleshow/118742649.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["cottonseed oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","investigation"],"locations":["Kadi, Mehsana, Gujarat, India"],"primary_state":"Gujarat","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"Ahmedabad: More than 2,300kg of adulterated paneer was seized during a raid by a Food and Drug Control Administration (FDCA) team on Tuesday. The operation targeted Keshvi Food Products in Narsihpura in Kadi, Mehsana,...","search_text":"$11e"},{"article_id":"fe4e9bc0-2802-4dd8-97e4-27704fad2a1b","slug":"ghee-fe4e9bc0-2802-4dd8-97e4-27704fad2a1b","title":"SIT resumes questioning of two accused in Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration case - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-03-04","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/vijayawada/sit-resumes-questioning-of-two-accused-in-tirupati-laddu-ghee-adulteration-case/articleshow/118716044.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.24606179,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal fats"],"actions":["custody","questioning"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"Tirupati: The special investigation team (SIT) resumed the questioning of two of the accused in the Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration case following a local court order, on Tuesday. The special investigation team probing...","search_text":"$11f"},{"article_id":"9fe3b91d-3719-4260-926a-d5711bd1efc4","slug":"ghee-9fe3b91d-3719-4260-926a-d5711bd1efc4","title":"4000 kg adulterated ghee worth Rs 17.5 lakh seized in this state - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-02-27","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/life-style/food-news/4000-kg-adulterated-ghee-worth-rs-17-5-lakh-seized-in-this-state/articleshow/118608704.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["soybean","interesterified vegetable fat"],"actions":["seizure","license_cancellation"],"locations":["Deesa, Banaskantha, Gujarat, India"],"primary_state":"Gujarat","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":11,"excerpt":"From Ayurveda to medical science, everyone considers ghee to be a nutrient-rich liquid that can help boost mental health, physical health, and overall metabolism. But, what if the same ghee turns out to be the reason...","search_text":"$120"},{"article_id":"58163259-bc87-4025-a6cc-f3a0848b52cf","slug":"ghee-58163259-bc87-4025-a6cc-f3a0848b52cf","title":"Gujarat FDCA seizes 4,000 kg ‘adulterated’ ghee worth Rs 17.5 lakh","source":"indianexpress.com","date":"2025-02-27","url":"https://indianexpress.com/article/cities/ahmedabad/gujarat-fdca-seizes-4000-kg-adulterated-ghee-worth-rs-17-5-lakh-9858379/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.91872434,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","license cancellation"],"locations":["Deesa, Banaskantha, Gujarat, India"],"primary_state":"Gujarat","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"The Gujarat Food and Drugs Control Administration (FDCA) Wednesday seized 4,000 kg of suspected adulterated ghee in Deesa town of Banaskantha district. The ghee, from Shri Navkar Dairy Products, was prima facie...","search_text":"$121"},{"article_id":"c4b35547-a0d3-4cad-b391-177ba64d7c63","slug":"ghee-c4b35547-a0d3-4cad-b391-177ba64d7c63","title":"Tirupati laddu row: Firm allowed to run plant except ghee, milk powder units","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2025-02-22","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/tamil-nadu/2025/Feb/22/tirupati-laddu-row-firm-allowed-to-run-plant-except-ghee-milk-powder-units","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.31906806,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["suspension of licence"],"locations":["Madurai, Tamil Nadu, India"],"primary_state":"Tamil Nadu","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"MADURAI: The Madurai Bench of the Madras High Court on Friday permitted AR Dairy Food Private Limited to operate all its units except that of ghee and skimmed milk powder. Justice V Lakshminarayanan passed the interim...","search_text":"$122"},{"article_id":"9285d418-e4e3-40a1-b1d1-da857748bfd3","slug":"ghee-9285d418-e4e3-40a1-b1d1-da857748bfd3","title":"Custodial Interrogation in TTD Laddu Ghee Case Ends","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2025-02-19","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/andhra-pradesh/custodial-interrogation-in-ttd-laddu-ghee-case-ends-1862035","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["lab_confirmed"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal fat"],"actions":["custodial interrogation","bail petition"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":11,"excerpt":"SIT presents accused in court; bail hearing postponed as investigation uncovers forged documents and adulteration links. Tirupati: The custodial interrogation of the four accused in the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams...","search_text":"$123"},{"article_id":"oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","slug":"oil-2a83d0762b1ee1b8","title":"Fake oil, other items worth Rs8.5 lakh seized | Nagpur News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-02-16","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/nagpur/fake-oil-other-items-worth-rs8-5-lakh-seized/articleshow/118285152.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.6327850615796671,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["counterfeit","substitution"],"adulterants":["local oil"],"actions":["raid","seizure","booking"],"locations":["Nagpur, Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Nagpur: Following a complaint about fake oil with labels and packaging of branded companies being sold, crime branch sleuths conducted a raid on Friday at a godown on Outer Ring Road in Hudkeshwar. Cops found a factory...","search_text":"$124"},{"article_id":"3282adec-c328-4317-a091-a126587d78de","slug":"ghee-3282adec-c328-4317-a091-a126587d78de","title":"CBI suspects role of TTD â_x0080__x0098_insidersâ_x0080__x0099_ in laddu ghee adulteration case | Vijayawada News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-02-13","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/vijayawada/cbi-suspects-role-of-ttd-insiders-in-laddu-ghee-adulteration-case/articleshow/118222342.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.35825498,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":["substandard ghee"],"actions":["arrest","investigation"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"Tirupati: The CBI-led special investigation team is now looking at the role of people within the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams ( TTD) in the laddu ghee adulteration case. CBI has arrested four accused â R Rajasekharan...","search_text":"$125"},{"article_id":"7a707681-5edc-461c-b5a8-0057a374f3cc","slug":"ghee-7a707681-5edc-461c-b5a8-0057a374f3cc","title":"Uttarakhand firm behind adulterated ghee: SIT","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2025-02-12","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/india-news/uttarakhand-firm-behind-adulterated-gheesit-101739301270922.html","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.44506417,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["lab_confirmed"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal fat","vegetable fats"],"actions":["return of four ghee tankers","arrest of four persons"],"locations":["Tirupati, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":15,"excerpt":"Uttarakhand firm behind adulterated ghee: SIT The ghee which was found to be adulterated with animal fat and supplied to Tirumala temple for making of sacred “laddu prasadam” last year was supplied by Uttarakhand-based...","search_text":"$126"},{"article_id":"39a9fb26-817d-404e-a150-4e4c5ebc037c","slug":"ghee-39a9fb26-817d-404e-a150-4e4c5ebc037c","title":"Manhunt launched for ex-CEO of Vaishnavi Dairy in Tirumala Laddu ghee adulteration case","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2025-02-12","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/andhra-pradesh/2025/Feb/12/manhunt-launched-for-ex-ceo-of-vaishnavi-dairy-in-tirumala-laddu-ghee-adulteration-case","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.25803171,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["manhunt","investigation"],"locations":["India, Tirupati"],"accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":11,"excerpt":"TIRUPATI: In the Tirumala laddu ghee adulteration case, the Supreme Court-formed CBI-led Special Investigation Team (SIT) has launched a manhunt to nab Sabbi Kalimulla Khan, former CEO of Vaishnavi Dairy, Srikalahasti,...","search_text":"$127"},{"article_id":"4eb18b90-e310-48db-9531-68b146420749","slug":"ghee-4eb18b90-e310-48db-9531-68b146420749","title":"SIT probe reveals supply of adulterated ghee to TTD","source":"thehansindia.com","date":"2025-02-11","url":"https://www.thehansindia.com/andhra-pradesh/sit-probe-reveals-supply-of-adulterated-ghee-to-ttd-944370","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.41499921,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["lab_confirmed"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["vegetable fat","animal fat"],"actions":["warning to suppliers"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":11,"excerpt":"Tirupati: The remand report of the accused in the ghee adulteration case has uncovered significant findings from the Special Investigation Team (SIT) led by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI). The SIT arrested...","search_text":"$128"},{"article_id":"3797cfc4-05a5-422b-b823-ed3bb850f540","slug":"ghee-3797cfc4-05a5-422b-b823-ed3bb850f540","title":"CBI uncovers a web of deceit in Tirumala adulterated ghee case","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2025-02-11","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/andhra-pradesh/cbi-uncovers-a-web-of-deceit-in-tirumala-adulterated-ghee-case/article69206545.ece","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"provisional","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.53135818,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":3,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["testing"],"locations":["India, Tirumala"],"accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":13,"excerpt":"The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), which is probing the alleged Tirumala ghee adulteration case, has reportedly uncovered a web of deceit involving multiple entities. The remand report filed by the CBI,...","search_text":"$129"},{"article_id":"255ac21d-c17e-4926-9dad-13db7698ed72","slug":"ghee-255ac21d-c17e-4926-9dad-13db7698ed72","title":"Four held in TTD ghee row sent to jail till February 20","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2025-02-11","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/india-news/four-held-in-ttd-ghee-row-sent-to-jail-till-february-20-101739213703653.html","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.48440383,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution","mislabeling"],"adulterants":["adulterated ghee"],"actions":["arrest","police custody"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":8,"excerpt":"Four held in TTD ghee row sent to jail till February 20 The investigation revealed that AR Dairy, based in Tamil Nadu, secured the TTD contract to supply ghee at ₹319.80 per kg. However, AR Dairy did not have the...","search_text":"$12a"},{"article_id":"cddf4a6a-4d4e-4d8b-9631-734b807f7215","slug":"ghee-cddf4a6a-4d4e-4d8b-9631-734b807f7215","title":"Tirupati Laddu Prasadam row: CBI arrests four people in ghee adulteration case","source":"dnaindia.com","date":"2025-02-10","url":"https://www.dnaindia.com/india/report-tirupati-laddu-prasadam-row-cbi-arrests-four-people-in-ghee-adulteration-case-3131695","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.30555114,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal carcass residues"],"actions":["arrest","investigation"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":0,"excerpt":"INDIA The arrested individuals are linked to organizations that supplied ghee to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD), including AR Dairy from Tamil Nadu, Parag Dairy from UP, Premier Agri Foods, and Alpha Milk...","search_text":"$12b"},{"article_id":"c5597192-fe4a-479a-8bf7-cdcf15d74d10","slug":"ghee-c5597192-fe4a-479a-8bf7-cdcf15d74d10","title":"Tirupati Laddu Row: Four held by CBI in first arrests in Tirupati Laddu ghee adulteration case | Amaravati News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-02-10","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/hyderabad/four-held-by-cbi-in-first-arrests-in-tirupati-laddu-ghee-adulteration-case/articleshow/118097023.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.19604545,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal fat"],"actions":["arrest","blacklisting","investigation"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"TIRUPATI: In first arrests in the Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration case, the Special Investigation Team (SIT) of the CBI on Sunday took four people into custody, including the MD of the Tamil Naidu dairy in the eye of...","search_text":"$12c"},{"article_id":"c51ad2dc-5440-4692-bdac-73968c6ad4d2","slug":"ghee-c51ad2dc-5440-4692-bdac-73968c6ad4d2","title":"Four arrested in Tirupati laddu ghee adulteration case","source":"scroll.in","date":"2025-02-10","url":"https://scroll.in/latest/1078949/four-arrested-by-cbi-led-sit-in-probe-into-use-of-allegedly-adulterated-ghee-in-tirupati-laddus?utm_source=rss&utm_medium=public","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.39209438,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["arrest"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"Four persons have been arrested by the Central Bureau Of Investigation-led Special Investigation Team in connection with the alleged adulteration of the ghee used in the laddus offered as prasadam at Tirupati’s Sri...","search_text":"$12d"},{"article_id":"bcd183c8-344e-4cb8-8561-8c2e6a027897","slug":"ghee-bcd183c8-344e-4cb8-8561-8c2e6a027897","title":"Tirupati: 'CBI Arrests 4 In Tirumala Srivari Laddu Ghee Adulteration Case': Telugu Desam Party","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2025-02-10","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/india/tirupati-cbi-arrests-4-in-tirumala-srivari-laddu-ghee-adulteration-case-telugu-desam-party","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.30630713,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal carcass residues"],"actions":["arrest","investigation"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Amaravati: The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) has arrested four individuals in connection with the adulteration of ghee used in the Tirumala Srivari Laddu, according to sources from Telugu Desam Party (TDP). The...","search_text":"$12e"},{"article_id":"8b1ef2e6-f7a2-4db0-9589-42159cf06574","slug":"ghee-8b1ef2e6-f7a2-4db0-9589-42159cf06574","title":"Tirupati Laddu row: Four arrested individuals sent to judicial custody till February 20","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-02-10","url":"https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/india/tirupati-laddu-row-cbi-arrests-four-individuals-for-violations-during-ghee-supply/articleshow/118101787.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.35075962,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["foreign fats"],"actions":["blacklisting"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Related A Tirupati court, later in the day, sent the four arrested accused to judicial custody till February 20. The action was taken as the investigation revealed serious violations during ghee supply, with...","search_text":"$12f"},{"article_id":"54686005-b842-4cc5-82b1-0276e36a42b6","slug":"ghee-54686005-b842-4cc5-82b1-0276e36a42b6","title":"Tirumala laddu row: CBI arrests four suppliers involved in the Tirumala ghee adulteration case","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2025-02-10","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/andhra-pradesh/cbi-arrests-four-suppliers-involved-in-the-tirumala-ghee-adulteration-case/article69202348.ece","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.39594266,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal fat"],"actions":["arrest","judicial custody"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":11,"excerpt":"In a significant breakthrough, the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) has arrested four suppliers implicated in the Tirumala alleged ghee adulteration scandal. The accused include managing director of AR Dairy...","search_text":"$130"},{"article_id":"9d92713b-a9c4-4b7e-87f4-c4fd443e38b5","slug":"ghee-9d92713b-a9c4-4b7e-87f4-c4fd443e38b5","title":"Probe agency arrests four persons in Tirupati ghee adulteration case: Sources","source":"indiatoday.in","date":"2025-02-09","url":"https://www.indiatoday.in/india/story/tirupati-laddu-row-cbi-arrest-tirumala-ghee-adulteration-case-probe-2677329-2025-02-09?utm_source=rss","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.38614763,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution","counterfeit"],"adulterants":["impure substances"],"actions":["arrest","investigation"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Probe agency arrests four persons in Tirupati ghee adulteration case: Sources The CBI arrested four individuals over adulteration in Tirumala laddu ghee supply. The probe revealed forged documents and tender...","search_text":"$131"},{"article_id":"45fdd40d-5bc4-4fe7-9eb9-883c55f14a70","slug":"ghee-45fdd40d-5bc4-4fe7-9eb9-883c55f14a70","title":"25% of food samples tested in Raj in 2024 found adulterated | Jaipur News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-02-04","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/jaipur/25-of-food-samples-tested-in-raj-in-2024-found-adulterated/articleshow/117897659.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.36954633,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["vegetable fats"],"actions":["Seizure of 6.6 lakh kgs adulterated food"],"locations":["Rajasthan, India"],"primary_state":"Rajasthan","accepted_triplet_count":5,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":12,"excerpt":"Jaipur: In a troubling revelation, laboratory analyses conducted by the health department in Rajasthan have indicated that a significant 25.5% of food samples tested in 2024 were found to be substandard and adulterated....","search_text":"$132"},{"article_id":"df6dd614-6785-4c3a-b6c7-1e091a751c64","slug":"ghee-df6dd614-6785-4c3a-b6c7-1e091a751c64","title":"Many Restaurants Violated Food Safety Rules: Task Force Officials","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2025-02-03","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/telangana/many-restaurants-violated-food-safety-rules-task-force-officials-1858555","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.27830904,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["contamination"],"adulterants":["houseflies and mosquitoes"],"actions":["immediate rectification notice"],"locations":["Raghunathpally, Jangaon, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":6,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"At Kishkindha Kitchen, also in Jubilee Hills, which lacked essential documents, the refrigerators were found to be dirty and filled with food waste, while kitchen drains were clogged with waste Hyderabad: Inspections by...","search_text":"$133"},{"article_id":"d2f303e3-c25c-412f-8ae4-4ec525f68736","slug":"ghee-d2f303e3-c25c-412f-8ae4-4ec525f68736","title":"Mosquitoes Found In Ghee: Mosquitoes in ghee and dead lizard found in dairy items in this city - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-02-02","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/life-style/food-news/mosquitoes-in-ghee-and-dead-lizard-found-in-dairy-items-in-this-city/articleshow/117855423.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.22162816,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["contamination"],"adulterants":["mosquitoes"],"actions":["inspection"],"locations":["Jangaon, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Authorities recently conducted an inspection at Shakti Milk and Milk Products in Raghunathpally Mandal, Jangaon district, uncovering multiple violations related to hygiene and food safety standards. The findings have...","search_text":"$134"},{"article_id":"bf5cf44c-c3df-4c9c-b13b-8a0108b8a106","slug":"ghee-bf5cf44c-c3df-4c9c-b13b-8a0108b8a106","title":"Mosquitoes in ghee, dead lizard: Telangana food commissioner uncovers violations at dairy inspection","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2025-02-02","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/trending/mosquitoes-in-ghee-dead-lizard-telangana-food-commissioner-uncovers-violations-at-dairy-inspection-101738476068831.html","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.18269868,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","contamination"],"adulterants":["mosquitoes","houseflies"],"actions":["seizure","sample_collection"],"locations":["Jangaon, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Mosquitoes in ghee, dead lizard: Telangana food commissioner uncovers violations at dairy inspection A state-level task force inspection in Telangana uncovered significant sanitary breaches at Shakti Milk and Milk...","search_text":"$135"},{"article_id":"9cbf8104-4fa2-4365-bc32-09eb2d1c9381","slug":"ghee-9cbf8104-4fa2-4365-bc32-09eb2d1c9381","title":"Telangana dairy inspection reveals contaminated ghee, dead lizard near food","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2025-02-02","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/telangana/telangana-dairy-inspection-reveals-contaminated-ghee-dead-lizard-near-food-1858425","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.18685632,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["contamination","adulteration"],"adulterants":["mosquitoes","houseflies"],"actions":["inspection","sample collection"],"locations":["Jangaon, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":5,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"Shakti Dairy in Jangaon flagged for major food safety violations An inspection at a leading dairy shop in Telangana's Jangaon district took food safety officials by surprise on Saturday when they found ghee stored...","search_text":"$136"},{"article_id":"508d009a-650f-4e40-b03d-ebef9d2c069e","slug":"ghee-508d009a-650f-4e40-b03d-ebef9d2c069e","title":"Telangana: Houseflies in ghee; dead lizard, spider web, and patchy roof found during inspection at dairy product unit | Today News","source":"livemint.com","date":"2025-02-02","url":"https://www.livemint.com/news/india/telangana-houseflies-in-ghee-dead-lizard-spider-web-and-patchy-roof-found-during-inspection-at-dairy-product-unit-11738481820439.html","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.19217876,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["contamination"],"adulterants":["houseflies","mosquitoes"],"actions":["inspection","sample collection"],"locations":["Jangaon, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Telangana: Houseflies in ghee; dead lizard, spider web, and patchy roof found during inspection at dairy product unit A recent inspection at Shakti Milk and Milk Products in Jangaon, Telangana revealed severe food...","search_text":"$137"},{"article_id":"9bd6a50e-945d-42d4-88de-97e83b4c3b06","slug":"ghee-9bd6a50e-945d-42d4-88de-97e83b4c3b06","title":"25 tons of adulterated ghee seized in this city: 8 ways to identify fake ghee - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-01-13","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/life-style/food-news/25-tons-of-adulterated-ghee-seized-in-this-city-8-ways-to-identify-fake-ghee/articleshow/117206895.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.90728509,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["India, Surat"],"accepted_triplet_count":8,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":11,"excerpt":"Ghee, also known as clarified butter, is a staple in many Indian households and is highly valued in Ayurveda for its medicinal properties, believed to promote digestion, boost immunity, and nourish the skin and hair. It...","search_text":"$138"},{"article_id":"f40851bc-e6e8-4605-ba83-f44d932b4760","slug":"ghee-f40851bc-e6e8-4605-ba83-f44d932b4760","title":"Brothers caught running spurious ghee racket in Olpad | Surat News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2025-01-11","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/surat/brothers-caught-running-spurious-ghee-racket-in-olpad/articleshow/117155656.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"event_count":3,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","arrest","testing"],"locations":["Surat, Gujarat, India, Olpad, Surat, Gujarat"],"primary_state":"Gujarat","accepted_triplet_count":15,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":12,"excerpt":"Surat: The state monitoring cell of Gujarat Police raided two factories, run by a pair of brothers, that were allegedly making spurious ghee, in an industrial estate in the Olpad area of Surat district on Saturday....","search_text":"$139"},{"article_id":"5804b97c-c416-49d1-9fbd-5bb52c0595dd","slug":"ghee-5804b97c-c416-49d1-9fbd-5bb52c0595dd","title":"Ludhiana: Seized by health officials, ghee, oil ‘stolen’; three booked","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2025-01-10","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/cities/chandigarh-news/ludhiana-seized-by-health-officials-ghee-oil-stolen-three-booked-101736529578743.html","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"provisional","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.87953022,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["India, Panchsheel Vihar, Barewal"],"accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Ludhiana: Seized by health officials, ghee, oil ‘stolen’; three booked The complainant said a health team conducted a raid at the unit in Panchsheel Vihar, Barewal; the team found adulterated desi ghee, vanaspati ghee...","search_text":"$13a"},{"article_id":"6901ef7b-f98a-4b3a-b622-85196fe10ffb","slug":"ghee-6901ef7b-f98a-4b3a-b622-85196fe10ffb","title":"How eating adulterated ghee affects health","source":"indianexpress.com","date":"2025-01-02","url":"https://indianexpress.com/article/lifestyle/food-wine/tirupati-laddoo-controversy-eating-adulterated-ghee-affect-health-9589633/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.44818713,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":3,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["alleged"],"locations":["India, Tirupati"],"accepted_triplet_count":6,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":16,"excerpt":"Ghee, a staple in many households, is revered for its rich flavour and numerous health benefits. However, in the past few days, the food product has been getting a bad name, especially since claims of the ghee used in...","search_text":"$13b"},{"article_id":"oil-c3728ff063420cf8","slug":"oil-c3728ff063420cf8","title":"Major crackdown on adulterated ghee and oil in Pokaran over 14000kg seized","source":"timesofindia.indiatimes.com","date":"2025-01-01","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/jaipur/major-crackdown-on-adulterated-ghee-and-oil-in-pokaran-over-14000kg-seized/articleshow/131486941.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["ghee","edible oil","palm oil","soybean oil","vanaspati"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["surprise raid","seizure","detention"],"locations":["Pokaran, Jaisalmer, Rajasthan, India"],"primary_state":"Rajasthan","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"JAISALMER: In a major action under the Rajasthan Government’s “Shuddh Aahar Milawat Par Vaar” campaign, authorities raided an illegal adulterated ghee and oil manufacturing unit in Pokaran late Sunday night and seized...","search_text":"$13c"},{"article_id":"oil-d7ec006e22e070de","slug":"oil-d7ec006e22e070de","title":"Punjab &amp; Haryana high court asks Centre if they plan to open more labs to check cooking oil adulteration","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2024-12-15","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/cities/chandigarh-news/punjab-haryana-high-court-asks-centre-if-there-are-plans-to-open-more-labs-to-check-cooking-oil-adulteration-101734204296975.html","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.6877170300506283,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["cooking oil","miscible oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["miscible oil"],"actions":["Directive to Centre on lab expansion"],"locations":["Chandigarh, Punjab, India"],"primary_state":"Punjab","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":9,"excerpt":"Punjab & Haryana high court asks Centre if they plan to open more labs to check cooking oil adulteration The court was hearing a 2015 public interest litigation (PIL) by a Kapurthala resident Rajesh Gupta The Punjab and...","search_text":"$13d"},{"article_id":"oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","slug":"oil-ca9b994ce2d3e502","title":"Hc Questions Lack Of Local Testing Infra For Mustard Oil Adulteration | Chandigarh News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-12-15","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/chandigarh/hc-questions-lack-of-local-testing-infra-for-mustard-oil-adulteration/articleshow/116327780.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.7483593569424143,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["mustard oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["other oils"],"actions":["order to collect mustard oil samples for testing","directive to find central govt policy"],"locations":["Chandigarh, Punjab and Haryana, India"],"primary_state":"Punjab and Haryana","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"Chandigarh: As cases of food adulteration rise, especially in edible oils, it is surprising that the region, including Punjab, Haryana, and Chandigarh, has no facility to check different parameters of adulteration in...","search_text":"$13e"},{"article_id":"oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","slug":"oil-dc0f3e7d98c4f1b5","title":"Dahod Police Bust Major Spurious Cooking Oil Racket, Seize Goods Worth Over Rs 15 Lakhs | Vadodara News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-12-10","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/vadodara/dahod-police-bust-major-spurious-cooking-oil-racket-seize-goods-worth-over-rs-15-lakhs/articleshow/116183542.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8624483698868526,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["cooking oil","palm oil"],"issue_types":["substitution","mislabeling","adulteration"],"adulterants":["palm oil"],"actions":["seizure","detention"],"locations":["Dahod, Gujarat, India"],"primary_state":"Gujarat","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"Vadodara: After the discovery of a fake govt office and the forgery of non-agriculture land orders, a racket involving the sale of spurious cooking oil has emerged in Dahod. The special operations group (SOG) of Dahod...","search_text":"$13f"},{"article_id":"oil-2f0a177eecae442b","slug":"oil-2f0a177eecae442b","title":"Investigation into Dropsy Deaths in Nabha: New Committee Formed to Probe Tainted Edible Oil | Chandigarh News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-11-27","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/chandigarh/investigation-into-dropsy-deaths-in-nabha-new-committee-formed-to-probe-tainted-edible-oil/articleshow/115711329.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.5135767479948466,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["lab_confirmed"],"food_items":["edible oil","mustard oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":["unfit edible oil"],"actions":["advisory","committee formation"],"locations":["Nabha, Patiala, Punjab, India"],"primary_state":"Punjab","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"Patiala: The Patiala deputy commissioner has constituted a five-member committee under Nabha SDM officer to scrutinise and take forward an earlier investigation by health officials into three dropsy deaths which took...","search_text":"$140"},{"article_id":"8ef8782e-cc91-4ddc-95d5-d260f1b7a518","slug":"ghee-8ef8782e-cc91-4ddc-95d5-d260f1b7a518","title":"SIT and CBI Investigate Adulterated Ghee in Srivari Laddu Prasadam","source":"thehansindia.com","date":"2024-11-25","url":"https://www.thehansindia.com/andhra-pradesh/sit-and-cbi-investigate-adulterated-ghee-in-srivari-laddu-prasadam-924427","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.19660052,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee","Srivari Laddu Prasadam"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["ghee"],"actions":["investigation"],"locations":["Tirumala, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":0,"excerpt":"The SIT investigation into the adulterated ghee in Srivari Laddu Prasadam is ongoing. The investigation has been taking place in Tirumala for the past two days. A SIT was formed along with CBI officials, following...","search_text":"SIT and CBI Investigate Adulterated Ghee in Srivari Laddu Prasadam thehansindia.com The SIT investigation into the adulterated ghee in Srivari Laddu Prasadam is ongoing. \nThe investigation has been taking place in Tirumala for the past two days. \nA SIT was formed along with CBI officials, following orders from the Supreme Court. \nThe investigation is being carried out under the supervision of CBI officials, with three teams involved. \nThe SIT team members have already collected details from the AR Dairy in Dindigul, Tamil Nadu, and inspected TTD News marketing warehouses in Tirupati. \nThey also inquired about the tenders for the purchase of ghee. \nThe investigation is based on a case registered at the Tirupati East police station. ghee Srivari Laddu Prasadam adulteration ghee investigation alleged Tirumala, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India Srivari Laddu Prasadam fflo:hasAdulterant ghee adulterated ghee in Srivari Laddu Prasadam"},{"article_id":"84a895b3-81ad-42e9-b54d-614c66aca856","slug":"ghee-84a895b3-81ad-42e9-b54d-614c66aca856","title":"Adulteration of TTD ghee: SIT inspects AR Dairy","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2024-11-25","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/andhra-pradesh/2024/Nov/25/adulteration-of-ttd-ghee-sit-inspects-ar-dairy","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.22971559,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["inspection","seizure"],"locations":["Dindigul, Tamil Nadu, India"],"primary_state":"Tamil Nadu","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"VIJAYAWADA: In a significant turn of events in the probe into adulteration of cow ghee supplied to Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam’s (TTD) Laddu Prasadam, the Special Investigation Team (SIT) conducted inspections at AR...","search_text":"$141"},{"article_id":"d2c92cf6-2a73-4e89-adff-db3cb523f8e1","slug":"ghee-d2c92cf6-2a73-4e89-adff-db3cb523f8e1","title":"SIT arrives in Tirupati to probe TTD ghee adulteration","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2024-11-23","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/andhra-pradesh/2024/Nov/23/sit-arrives-in-tirupati-to-probe-ttd-ghee-adulteration","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.11987132,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal fat"],"actions":["investigation"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"VIJAYAWADA: The Special Investigation Team (SIT), constituted by the Supreme Court to investigate alleged irregularities in the supply of substandard cow ghee and allegations of animal fat being used in the Laddu...","search_text":"$142"},{"article_id":"32bc8e29-1313-4d9b-86ff-8c3bb665f057","slug":"ghee-32bc8e29-1313-4d9b-86ff-8c3bb665f057","title":"Andhra Pradesh: CBI-led SIT team reaches Tirupati to probe into Tirumala laddu 'ghee adulteration' case | Vijayawada News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-11-22","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/vijayawada/andhra-pradesh-cbi-led-sit-team-reaches-tirupati-to-probe-into-tirumala-laddu-ghee-adulteration-case/articleshow/115571347.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee","laddu"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["animal fats"],"actions":["investigation"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"TIRUPATI: The Central Bureau of Investigation-led special investigation team launched its probe into the laddu-ghee adulteration case on Friday. On October 4, the Supreme Court of India ordered the constitution of a...","search_text":"$143"},{"article_id":"93c87fee-61ec-4ea8-bd4f-3434669835ee","slug":"ghee-93c87fee-61ec-4ea8-bd4f-3434669835ee","title":"CBI's SIT begins probe into Tirupati laddu 'ghee adulteration' case | Vijayawada News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-11-06","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/vijayawada/cbis-sit-investigation-unveils-ghee-adulteration-scandal-in-tirupati-laddu/articleshow/114998936.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.14086664,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal fat"],"actions":["SIT probe","blacklisting","criminal proceedings"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"TIRUPATI: The special investigation team (SIT) led by the CBI has formally started its probe into the alleged adulteration of ghee meant for preparation of Tirupati laddu prasadam. CBI officials who will be part of the...","search_text":"$144"},{"article_id":"oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","slug":"oil-b69aa408b924b9b4","title":"Gautam Budh Nagar: 370 kg sweets, 750 ltr oil seized in food safety checks","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2024-10-29","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/cities/noida-news/gautam-budh-nagar-370-kg-sweets-750-ltr-oil-seized-in-food-safety-checks-101730140849789.html","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","unsafe_food"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Noida, Gautam Budh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Gautam Budh Nagar: 370 kg sweets, 750 ltr oil seized in food safety checks Multiple teams of the Gautam Budh Nagar Food Safety and Drug Administration are conducting raids and collecting samples to ensure good quality...","search_text":"$145"},{"article_id":"905b10d3-5531-40bc-b5e3-84beb79f1af2","slug":"ghee-905b10d3-5531-40bc-b5e3-84beb79f1af2","title":"Fake Ghee: : Amul issues warning against fake ghee sales ahead of Diwali: Tip to identify real Amul ghee | - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-10-26","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/life-style/food-news/amul-warns-against-fake-ghee-sales-ahead-of-diwali-tips-to-identify-authentic-products/articleshow/114609497.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.5410802,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["counterfeit","adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":[],"locations":["India"],"accepted_triplet_count":5,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":10,"excerpt":"With Diwali just around the corner, demand for ghee skyrockets as families gear up to prepare traditional sweets such as Laddoo, Halwa, various kinds of snacks and dishes. But in an unfortunate twist, this has also seen...","search_text":"$146"},{"article_id":"368930a7-2085-43bd-bb79-62d471c9e75c","slug":"ghee-368930a7-2085-43bd-bb79-62d471c9e75c","title":"Why food adulterators in India have all five fingers in ghee","source":"indiatoday.in","date":"2024-10-26","url":"https://www.indiatoday.in/india/story/fake-desi-ghee-racket-investigation-amul-counterfeit-adulteration-festive-season-diwali-2623545-2024-10-26?utm_source=rss","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.67290743,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":3,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["raided","uncovered","alleged"],"locations":["India, Rajkot","India, Hathras","India, Tirumala Tirupati Shrine"],"accepted_triplet_count":8,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":17,"excerpt":"Why food adulterators in India have all five fingers in ghee Every festive season, adulterated food products, including ghee, flood India. Dairy giant Amul has issued a public warning about counterfeit ghee circulating...","search_text":"$147"},{"article_id":"77ed2567-2595-48f0-891b-a753164f2866","slug":"ghee-77ed2567-2595-48f0-891b-a753164f2866","title":"Avoid Adulterated Ghee: 6 Easy Steps To Make Pure Quality Ghee At Home","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2024-10-25","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/ampstories/lifestyle/avoid-adulterated-ghee-6-easy-steps-to-make-pure-quality-ghee-at-home","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.47929391,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["recall_triggered"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["reports of fake ghee being busted at trusted stores"],"locations":["India, trusted stores"],"accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":0,"excerpt":"Avoid Adulterated Ghee: 6 Easy Steps To Make Pure Quality Ghee At Home By: Amisha Shirgave | October 25, 2024 Gievn the current reports of fake ghee being busted at trusted stores, you should not compromise on the...","search_text":"$148"},{"article_id":"a7002128-c4bc-48cd-bed1-46a529e69132","slug":"ghee-a7002128-c4bc-48cd-bed1-46a529e69132","title":"FDA seizes food samples worth  ₹10.35 lakhs","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2024-10-19","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/cities/pune-news/fda-seizes-food-samples-worth-10-35-lakhs-101729276408292.html","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.41823037,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","improvement_notice"],"locations":["Pune, Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"FDA seizes food samples worth ₹10.35 lakhs The special campaign took place in the Pune region, which encompasses Pune, Solapur, Satara, Sangli, and Kolhapur districts The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) seized...","search_text":"$149"},{"article_id":"e4aba04c-81ff-438c-a506-881ff2436c82","slug":"ghee-e4aba04c-81ff-438c-a506-881ff2436c82","title":"Massive Seizure of 3,100kg Adulterated Ghee in Barmer Amid Festive Season | Jaipur News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-10-17","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/jaipur/massive-seizure-of-3100kg-adulterated-ghee-in-barmer-amid-festive-season/articleshow/114293126.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"provisional","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.66136116,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["India, Barmer"],"accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Jaisalmer: As the festive season begins, health department intensified efforts to combat food adulteration in Barmer. On Wednesday, the central food safety team seized 3,100 kg of adulterated ghee in a joint operation....","search_text":"$14a"},{"article_id":"fc91133d-e4b6-4458-8d6c-cb1af7bcd97e","slug":"ghee-fc91133d-e4b6-4458-8d6c-cb1af7bcd97e","title":"Tirupati laddoo row: Names of two cops sent to SC to probe ghee adulteration","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2024-10-16","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/andhra-pradesh/2024/Oct/16/tirupati-laddoo-row-names-of-two-cops-sent-to-sc-to-probe-ghee-adulteration","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.17312005,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee","Laddu Prasadam"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["adulterated ghee"],"actions":["constitution of an SIT"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":0,"excerpt":"VIJAYAWADA: Director General of Police (DGP) Ch Dwaraka Tirumala Rao said the names of Guntur Range Inspector General of Police (IG) Sarvashresth Tripathi and Visakhapatnam Range Deputy Inspector General (DIG) Gopinath...","search_text":"$14b"},{"article_id":"oil-a7080ed266c36f88","slug":"oil-a7080ed266c36f88","title":"Health Crisis in Nabha: Urgent Advisory After Fatal Dropsy Cases","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-10-15","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/chandigarh/health-crisis-in-nabha-urgent-advisory-after-fatal-dropsy-cases/articleshow/114230683.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8929,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["mustard oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["argemone"],"actions":["advisory"],"locations":["Nabha, Patiala, Punjab, India"],"primary_state":"Punjab","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"Patiala: After the death of three members of a family in Nabha from dropsy in Sept likely due to the consumption of adulterated edible oil, the health department has issued an advisory to officials, including senior...","search_text":"$14c"},{"article_id":"oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","slug":"oil-aca35e8b9bccaa60","title":"Adulterated mustard oil behind 3 dropsy deaths in Nabha: report","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2024-10-14","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/cities/chandigarh-news/adulterated-mustard-oil-behind-3-dropsy-deaths-in-nabha-report-101728847891766.html","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.7115505895110944,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["lab_confirmed"],"food_items":["mustard oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","contamination"],"adulterants":["argemone mexicana seeds"],"actions":["survey"],"locations":["Nabha, Patiala, Punjab, India"],"primary_state":"Punjab","accepted_triplet_count":5,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"Adulterated mustard oil behind 3 dropsy deaths in Nabha: report Three members of the family died in September, with two women aged 26 and 32, succumbing at private hospitals, while a 72-year-old man died at his...","search_text":"$14d"},{"article_id":"89e1831f-7c8d-46ad-b545-7b0e141b1fa7","slug":"ghee-89e1831f-7c8d-46ad-b545-7b0e141b1fa7","title":"Food items worth Rs 4.5 cr seized in raids","source":"indianexpress.com","date":"2024-10-14","url":"https://indianexpress.com/article/cities/ahmedabad/gujarat-food-adulterated-ghee-raid-seized-9618849/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.49292933,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","legal action"],"locations":["Mehsana, Patan, Gujarat, India"],"primary_state":"Gujarat","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"Food items worth Rs 4.5 crore, suspected to be unhealthy, have been seized in raids across Gujarat under the Food Safety Fortnight campaign, the state government said on Sunday in an official release. The special drive...","search_text":"$14e"},{"article_id":"d96f8ae8-4753-4f7b-9ec5-3238eca05841","slug":"ghee-d96f8ae8-4753-4f7b-9ec5-3238eca05841","title":"Markets Flooded With ‘Spurious Ghee’ | FSOs Collect Samples Of Over 30 Ghee Brands, Waiting For Reports","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2024-10-13","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/indore/markets-flooded-with-spurious-ghee-fsos-collect-samples-of-over-30-ghee-brands-waiting-for-reports","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.4864671,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":2,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Indore (, Madhya Pradesh, India, Indore (Madhya Pradesh)"],"primary_state":"Madhya Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":5,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":8,"excerpt":"Indore (Madhya Pradesh): While samples of a ghee brand, which was ready to be sold in a huge quantity across the city, failed to clear the quality test, there are over 30 sample reports of such suspicious ghee due with...","search_text":"$14f"},{"article_id":"26b11917-4e55-41d5-aeb1-64e8b44bedba","slug":"ghee-26b11917-4e55-41d5-aeb1-64e8b44bedba","title":"Crackdown Against Adulteration In Indore: FSOs Seize 850 Kg Of Spurious Ghee; Samples Fail Quality Test","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2024-10-12","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/indore/crackdown-against-adulteration-in-indore-fsos-seize-850-kg-of-spurious-ghee-samples-fail-quality-test","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["India, Indore"],"accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":8,"excerpt":"Indore (Madhya Pradesh): In a significant action against adulterated food products, food safety officers seized 850 kilograms of ghee found to be adulterated after samples failed quality tests. The raid on the...","search_text":"$150"},{"article_id":"oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77","slug":"oil-9087ba5d7aa31b77","title":"‘3 Dropsy deaths’: Patiala health officials launch probe","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2024-10-10","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/cities/chandigarh-news/3-dropsy-deaths-patiala-health-officials-launch-probe-101728500333054.html","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.92,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8445,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["mustard oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","contamination"],"adulterants":["Argemone mexicana seed oil"],"actions":["probe"],"locations":["Nabha, Patiala, Punjab, India"],"primary_state":"Punjab","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"‘3 Dropsy deaths’: Patiala health officials launch probe The probe was launched after a 52-year-old woman, a relative of the deceased, was admitted to PGIMER, Chandigarh. The medical history review of the patient...","search_text":"$151"},{"article_id":"ce0c52be-896a-479c-b92b-09bf3518d332","slug":"ghee-ce0c52be-896a-479c-b92b-09bf3518d332","title":"Tirupati laddoo row: Joint team raids ghee manufacturer in Uttarakhand","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2024-10-06","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/nation/2024/Oct/06/tirupati-laddoo-row-joint-team-raids-ghee-manufacturer-in-uttarakhand","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.34671446,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["beef tallow","fish oil","foreign fats"],"actions":["raid","sealed premises","blacklisted supplier"],"locations":["Roorkee, Haridwar, Uttarakhand, India"],"primary_state":"Uttarakhand","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"DEHRADUN: In a surprise operation, a joint team of food safety officials from Andhra Pradesh and Uttarakhand swooped down on a ghee manufacturing company in Bhagwanpur, Roorkee, on Sunday. Sources have revealed that the...","search_text":"$152"},{"article_id":"66bb816a-1961-4e45-8460-9328304c7956","slug":"ghee-66bb816a-1961-4e45-8460-9328304c7956","title":"Omfed under lens for substandard ghee supply","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2024-10-05","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/odisha/2024/Oct/05/omfed-under-lens-for-substandard-ghee-supply","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.32336005,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","mislabeling"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["notice to Omfed"],"locations":["Jagatsinghpur, Odisha, India"],"primary_state":"Odisha","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":8,"excerpt":"JAGATSINGHPUR: Priests of Maa Sarala temple on Friday alleged that state milk cooperative Omfed has supplied substandard ghee to the shrine for preparation of prasad. In response, the food safety officer issued a notice...","search_text":"$153"},{"article_id":"590fff58-7ba9-4a5b-8232-4c27d67f13b1","slug":"ghee-590fff58-7ba9-4a5b-8232-4c27d67f13b1","title":"Ghee for Tirupati laddus not made at TN dairy, reveals document","source":"siasat.com","date":"2024-10-05","url":"https://www.siasat.com/ghee-for-tirupati-laddus-not-made-at-tn-dairy-reveals-document-3108193/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.3362885,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal fat"],"actions":["show-cause notice","blacklisting"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":13,"excerpt":"Tirupati: Eight tankers of alleged adulterated ghee which arrived at Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam (TTD) in June and July this year for making laddu prasadam had not originated from the Tamil Nadu-based dairy, which was...","search_text":"$154"},{"article_id":"2c075e82-3fe3-4b95-a68a-f0fad41e51f5","slug":"ghee-2c075e82-3fe3-4b95-a68a-f0fad41e51f5","title":"Ghee supplied for Tirupati laddus not made at TN dairy, reveals document","source":"thehansindia.com","date":"2024-10-05","url":"https://www.thehansindia.com/andhra-pradesh/ghee-supplied-for-tirupati-laddus-not-made-at-tn-dairy-reveals-document-912370","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"provisional","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.32223966,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["tests of the samples collected from four tankers revealed the presence of animal fat"],"locations":["India, Tirupati"],"accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":10,"excerpt":"Tirupati : Eight tankers of alleged adulterated ghee which arrived at Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam (TTD) in June and July this year for making laddu prasadam had not originated from the Tamil Nadu-based dairy, which...","search_text":"$155"},{"article_id":"22261df7-8974-447f-a1cf-192c59528f64","slug":"ghee-22261df7-8974-447f-a1cf-192c59528f64","title":"Ghee supplied for Tirupati laddus not made at TN dairy, reveals document","source":"theshillongtimes.com","date":"2024-10-05","url":"https://theshillongtimes.com/2024/10/05/ghee-supplied-for-tirupati-laddus-not-made-at-tn-dairy-reveals-document/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.29920602,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal fat"],"actions":["show-cause notice","blacklisting"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":8,"excerpt":"Tirupati, Oct 5: Eight tankers of alleged adulterated ghee which arrived at Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam (TTD) in June and July this year for making laddu prasadam had not originated from the Tamil Nadu-based dairy,...","search_text":"$156"},{"article_id":"b77861f3-9e86-4450-a13f-4522abb6a8ef","slug":"ghee-b77861f3-9e86-4450-a13f-4522abb6a8ef","title":"Tirupati Laddu Row: SC Orders New SIT Probe Into Ghee Adulteration","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2024-10-04","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/andhra-pradesh/tirupati-laddu-row-sc-orders-new-sit-probe-into-ghee-adulteration-1828123","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.10485657,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["investigation"],"locations":["India, Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams"],"accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"CBI Director to Supervise Investigations Vijayawada: The Supreme Court has ordered an inquiry into the allegation that adulterated ghee was used for laddu prasadam preparations at the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams. A...","search_text":"$157"},{"article_id":"93ec7040-a06c-4da5-b0b1-626399456a8a","slug":"ghee-93ec7040-a06c-4da5-b0b1-626399456a8a","title":"Supreme Court orders SIT probe into alleged use of adulterated ghee in Tirupati laddus","source":"scroll.in","date":"2024-10-04","url":"https://scroll.in/latest/1074068/supreme-court-orders-sit-probe-into-alleged-use-of-adulterated-ghee-in-tirupati-laddus?utm_source=rss&utm_medium=public","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.18636856,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal fat"],"actions":["SIT probe ordered"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"The Supreme Court on Friday ordered a Special Investigation Team to probe allegations by the Andhra Pradesh government that the previous administration had used ghee adulterated with animal fat to prepare laddus at the...","search_text":"$158"},{"article_id":"554708da-6872-4a1b-91cc-3beeb59fbf2e","slug":"ghee-554708da-6872-4a1b-91cc-3beeb59fbf2e","title":"SC constitutes new five-member SIT to investigate adulterated ghee claims under CBI chief","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-10-04","url":"https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/india/sc-constitutes-new-five-member-sit-to-investigate-adulterated-ghee-claims-under-cbi-chief/articleshow/113948262.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.19655699,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal fat"],"actions":["SIT constitution"],"locations":["Tirumala, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"New Delhi: The Supreme Court on Friday ordered the constitution of an independent five-member special investigation team ( SIT) to probe allegations that adulterated ghee containing animal fat was used for preparing...","search_text":"$159"},{"article_id":"4c67d899-fab5-4e78-9274-526d6a4fe0bb","slug":"ghee-4c67d899-fab5-4e78-9274-526d6a4fe0bb","title":"Supreme Court Forms New SIT to Investigate Tirupati Laddu Ghee Adulteration Controversy | Vijayawada News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-10-04","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/vijayawada/tirupati-laddu-row-sc-appoints-independent-sit-to-investigate-ghee-adulteration/articleshow/113931149.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.12213306,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["lard","procured ghee"],"actions":["formation of SIT"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":5,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"VIJAYAWADA: The Supreme Court on Friday constituted an independent Special Investigation Team (SIT), replacing the one appointed by the Andhra Pradesh govt, to probe into the allegations of using adulterated ghee in the...","search_text":"$15a"},{"article_id":"03ea9124-befd-4983-bcdc-147e3ed3bf73","slug":"ghee-03ea9124-befd-4983-bcdc-147e3ed3bf73","title":"Ghee adulteration row: Andhra Pradesh Endowments Minister Anam Ramanarayana Reddy welcomes constitution of SIT by Supreme Court","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2024-10-04","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/andhra-pradesh/ghee-adulteration-row-andhra-pradesh-endowments-minister-anam-ramanarayana-reddy-welcomes-constitution-of-sit-by-supreme-court/article68718457.ece","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.9,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.18563806,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee","laddu prasadams"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["ghee"],"actions":["constitution of SIT"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"Andhra Pradesh Endowments Minister Anam Ramanarayana Reddy has welcomed the five-member Special Investigation Team (SIT) constituted by the Supreme Court of India to investigate the alleged adulteration of ghee used in...","search_text":"$15b"},{"article_id":"fb4d21e7-be93-4775-905f-977427db28c4","slug":"ghee-fb4d21e7-be93-4775-905f-977427db28c4","title":"TD Alleges Massive Irregularities in TTD Ghee Procurement","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2024-10-03","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/andhra-pradesh/td-alleges-massive-irregularities-in-ttd-ghee-procurement-1827659","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.32201573,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["adulterated ghee"],"actions":[],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Tirupati: The Telugu Desam has levelled allegations against the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams, alleging irregularities in procurement of ghee used for the Tirumala Laddu preparations during the YSR Congress term....","search_text":"$15c"},{"article_id":"7b3b345d-0902-4461-a6bc-747c26feb7f2","slug":"ghee-7b3b345d-0902-4461-a6bc-747c26feb7f2","title":"Tirupati laddu ghee row: MD of TN dairy firm moves Andhra HC seeking anticipatory bail - News Today | First with the news","source":"newstodaynet.com","date":"2024-10-02","url":"https://newstodaynet.com/2024/10/02/tirupati-laddu-ghee-row-md-of-tn-dairy-firm-moves-andhra-hc-seeking-anticipatory-bail/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.21524674,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal fat","lard"],"actions":["police complaint lodged","case transferred to Special Investigation Team","anticipatory bail sought"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"The MD of a Tamil Nadu-based dairy firm, which supplied ghee to Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam (TTD) has moved the Andhra Pradesh High Court seeking anticipatory bail in connection with a case registered against the...","search_text":"$15d"},{"article_id":"18f4411e-1d84-42c5-835a-97436ad30c7c","slug":"ghee-18f4411e-1d84-42c5-835a-97436ad30c7c","title":"Tirupati Laddu row: TDP raises doubts over ghee procurement at TTD at unviable rates during YSRCP term | Vijayawada News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-10-02","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/vijayawada/tirupati-laddu-row-tdp-raises-doubts-over-ghee-procurement-at-ttd-at-unviable-rates-during-ysrcp-term/articleshow/113877332.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.20102957,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee","laddu"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["adulterated ghee"],"actions":[],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"TIRUPATI: TDP state official spokesperson Anam Venkataramana Reddy expressed doubts about how the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams could procure ghee at rock bottom and unviable rates following the \"reverse rendering\"...","search_text":"$15e"},{"article_id":"oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","slug":"oil-3667d1bf7abe81ff","title":"Inspection Conducted at Burger King Outlet in Malakpet,","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2024-10-01","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/telangana/hyderabad-food-safety-dept-seizes-unsafe-cooking-oil-from-burger-king-outlet-1827348","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.2743342020610271,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["unclear"],"food_items":["palm oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","contamination"],"adulterants":["Total Polar Compound"],"actions":["Seizure of 15 litres of cooking oil"],"locations":["Hyderabad, Malakpet, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Advertisement Hyderabad: The Commissioner of Food Safety conducted inspection at a Burger King outlet at Malakpet in Hyderabad and found issues related to cooking oil. The palm oil used for frying non-vegetarian items...","search_text":"$15f"},{"article_id":"cf1f664f-fab8-46ef-9768-c3fc897d3913","slug":"ghee-cf1f664f-fab8-46ef-9768-c3fc897d3913","title":"SIT intensifies probe into ghee adulteration case","source":"thehansindia.com","date":"2024-10-01","url":"https://www.thehansindia.com/andhra-pradesh/sit-intensifies-probe-into-ghee-adulteration-case-910933","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.14972977,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal fat"],"actions":["investigation"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Tirupati: The Special Investigation Team (SIT), established by the AP government to probe allegations of adulterated ghee in the preparation of Tirumala Srivari laddus, ramped up its inquiry on Monday, marking the third...","search_text":"$160"},{"article_id":"4974f73f-37bc-4300-8d31-d97ca337365b","slug":"ghee-4974f73f-37bc-4300-8d31-d97ca337365b","title":"SIT probe into the alleged adulterated ghee temporarily suspended: Andhra Pradesh DGP Dwaraka Tirumala Rao","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2024-10-01","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/andhra-pradesh/sit-probe-into-the-alleged-adulterated-ghee-temporarily-suspended-andhra-pradesh-dgp-dwaraka-tirumala-rao/article68705297.ece","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.9,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.16363242,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal fat"],"actions":["temporary suspension of investigation"],"locations":["Tirumala, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"The investigation into the alleged use of adulterated ghee in the preparation of laddus at the temple of Lord Venkateswara has been temporarily suspended, according to Director General of Police (DGP) Ch. Dwaraka...","search_text":"$161"},{"article_id":"0a113e2a-26d3-45e4-9064-7cfa2f39230b","slug":"ghee-0a113e2a-26d3-45e4-9064-7cfa2f39230b","title":"Tirupati laddu row | On the economics of, and adulterants in ghee: Explained","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2024-10-01","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/health/tirupati-laddu-row-on-the-economics-of-and-adulterants-in-ghee-explained/article68705077.ece","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.16387322,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":2,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["lab_test"],"locations":["India, Tirupati"],"accepted_triplet_count":10,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":30,"excerpt":"The famous Tirupati laddus are at the centre of a controversy after Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N. Chandrababu Naidu claimed that ‘animal fat’ was in the ghee used to make the laddus during the previous regime headed...","search_text":"$162"},{"article_id":"cbdf7850-c12b-44e7-9a2a-2e88994f389f","slug":"ghee-cbdf7850-c12b-44e7-9a2a-2e88994f389f","title":"'Don't bring gods into Tirupati issue': SC questions Chandrababu Naidu govt over Tirupati laddoo ghee row - BusinessToday","source":"businesstoday.in","date":"2024-09-30","url":"https://www.businesstoday.in/india/story/dont-bring-gods-into-tirupati-issue-sc-questions-chandrababu-naidu-govt-over-tirupati-laddoo-ghee-row-448118-2024-09-30?utm_source=rssfeed","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.9,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.12971848,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal fat"],"actions":["court hearing"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"The Supreme Court has finally waded into the ongoing row over adulterated ghee used in preparing the highly sought-after 'prasadam' at the Tirupati temple in Andhra Pradesh. However, taking a critical stance on the...","search_text":"$163"},{"article_id":"75eac450-5d76-45da-975a-a47f1515ca01","slug":"ghee-75eac450-5d76-45da-975a-a47f1515ca01","title":"Supreme Court questions CM Naidu for Tirupati laddus adulteration claims","source":"opindia.com","date":"2024-09-30","url":"https://www.opindia.com/2024/09/no-proof-of-use-of-contaminated-ghee-supreme-court-questions-cm-naidu-on-public-statements-about-tirupati-laddus/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.20957629,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["animal fat","beef fat","pig fat","fish oil"],"actions":["investigation"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"On 30th September, the Supreme Court of India criticised Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu for making allegations publicly about the use of adulterated ghee in the preparation of laddus offered as...","search_text":"$164"},{"article_id":"26ac5726-fd69-42b8-a80e-6a71b91ba466","slug":"ghee-26ac5726-fd69-42b8-a80e-6a71b91ba466","title":"Tirupati Laddus Controversy: Understanding Supreme Court's Observations On Ghee Adulteration Claims In Four Points","source":"swarajyamag.com","date":"2024-09-30","url":"https://swarajyamag.com/news-brief/tirupati-laddus-controversy-understanding-supreme-courts-observations-on-ghee-adulteration-claims-in-four-points","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.16452134,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["fish oil","lard"],"actions":["investigation"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"The Supreme Court on Monday (30 September) heard a bunch of petitions seeking an independent or court-monitored investigation into allegations of adulteration of Tirupati laddus and sought Solicitor General (SG) Tushar...","search_text":"$165"},{"article_id":"141518ef-ce68-4969-bb2a-66f56733fab2","slug":"ghee-141518ef-ce68-4969-bb2a-66f56733fab2","title":"SIT Intensifies Probe of Adulterated Ghee in Tirumala Laddus","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2024-09-29","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/andhra-pradesh/sit-intensifies-probe-of-adulterated-ghee-in-tirumala-laddus-1826886","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.9,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.20644097,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal fat"],"actions":["probe"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Tirupati: The special investigation team has intensified its probe into allegations that adulterated ghee, possibly containing animal fat, was used in preparing the sacred Tirumala Srivari Laddus at the Lord...","search_text":"$166"},{"article_id":"0a342064-5378-4aff-b4aa-34ae5c1ab66b","slug":"ghee-0a342064-5378-4aff-b4aa-34ae5c1ab66b","title":"Tirumala Prasadam row: SIT intensifies probe into Tirupati Balaji Laddu-ghee adulteration case | Vijayawada News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-09-29","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/vijayawada/tirumala-prasadam-row-sit-intensifies-probe-into-tirupati-balaji-laddu-ghee-adulteration-case/articleshow/113785186.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.13806269,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal fats"],"actions":["investigation"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"TIRUPATI: The special investigation team (SIT) constituted by the Andhra Pradesh govt has intensified its investigation into the use of adulterated ghee in the preparation of the sacred Tirupati Laddu prasadams at the...","search_text":"$167"},{"article_id":"f121b53e-c2bd-4ce5-878c-fd5a64863273","slug":"ghee-f121b53e-c2bd-4ce5-878c-fd5a64863273","title":"Laddus, and economics of ghee","source":"thehindubusinessline.com","date":"2024-09-27","url":"https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/opinion/laddus-and-economics-of-ghee/article68691477.ece","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.3789588,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":2,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["testing"],"locations":["Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"In the last few days, politics in Andhra Pradesh has been all about sub-standard or adulterated laddus. There is nothing really new about politics being mixed with gods and goddesses, playing with the sentiments of...","search_text":"$168"},{"article_id":"d11fa038-1162-4d93-9df5-6d5b35b8628b","slug":"ghee-d11fa038-1162-4d93-9df5-6d5b35b8628b","title":"Shocking Test Results: 1 in 5 Ghee Samples Found Impure in Hyderabad | Hyderabad News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-09-27","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/hyderabad/shocking-test-results-1-in-5-ghee-samples-found-impure-in-hyderabad/articleshow/113715846.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.58954175,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":3,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["tested"],"locations":["India, Hyderabad"],"accepted_triplet_count":5,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":10,"excerpt":"Hyderabad: An investigation by food safety authorities into purity of ghee available in the market has revealed that one out of every five samples tested was either substandard or unsafe for consumption. Out of the 70...","search_text":"$169"},{"article_id":"a7cc57e8-71f7-4536-ba7c-452e09344a18","slug":"ghee-a7cc57e8-71f7-4536-ba7c-452e09344a18","title":"Andhra Pradesh government issues G.O. constituting SIT to probe supply of adulterated ghee to TTD","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2024-09-27","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/andhra-pradesh/andhra-pradesh-government-issues-go-constituting-sit-to-probe-supply-of-adulterated-ghee-to-ttd/article68691123.ece","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["unknown"],"actions":["investigation"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Andhra Pradesh Chief Secretary Neerabh Kumar Prasad has issued G.O. Rt. No. 1660, constituting a Special Investigation Team (SIT) to investigate the alleged supply of adulterated cow ghee to the Tirumala Tirupati...","search_text":"$16a"},{"article_id":"e2a4561f-b8bf-4ca9-9990-3b885eaf5c2b","slug":"ghee-e2a4561f-b8bf-4ca9-9990-3b885eaf5c2b","title":"TTD complaint on AR Dairy for allegedly supplying adulterated ghee","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2024-09-26","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/andhra-pradesh/2024/Sep/26/ttd-complaint-on-ar-dairy-for-allegedly-supplying-adulterated-ghee","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.54373496,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["complaint"],"locations":["Tamil Nadu, India"],"primary_state":"Tamil Nadu","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"VIJAYAWADA: The TTD lodged a complaint with police against Tamil Nadu-based AR Dairy Foods Private Limited for allegedly supplying adulterated ghee. In a written complaint, TTD’s marketing and procurement wing general...","search_text":"$16b"},{"article_id":"b556af30-b2db-4273-8b3b-a5b1ec113ebb","slug":"ghee-b556af30-b2db-4273-8b3b-a5b1ec113ebb","title":"Over 5,500 Kg Of Spurious Ghee Seized In Indore Ahead Of Navratri","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2024-09-26","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/indore/over-5500-kg-of-spurious-ghee-seized-in-indore-ahead-of-navratri","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8960886,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["palm oil","soybean oil","synthetic essence of ghee"],"actions":["seized","sealed"],"locations":["Indore, Madhya Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Madhya Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":5,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Indore (Madhya Pradesh): Ahead of Navratri and Diwali, the administration in Indore on Thursday raided a private firm and seized over 5,500 kg of spurious ghee, said an official from the Madhya Pradesh's food...","search_text":"$16c"},{"article_id":"f267ac1f-eff8-417a-8920-f8d37e384f79","slug":"ghee-f267ac1f-eff8-417a-8920-f8d37e384f79","title":"Tirumala laddu row: TTD lodges police complaint against AR Dairy for ‘supplying adulterated ghee’","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2024-09-25","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/andhra-pradesh/tirumala-laddu-row-ttd-lodges-police-complaint-against-ar-dairy-for-supplying-adulterated-ghee/article68681928.ece","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.32950212,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["police_complaint","SIT_constitution"],"locations":["Tirumala, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"The Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) on September 25 (Wednesday) lodged a complaint against the Dindigul-based AR Dairy for supplying adulterated ghee used in the preparation of laddu prasadams at the Tirumla...","search_text":"$16d"},{"article_id":"cd235f2c-1119-4002-b756-61e2983b0232","slug":"ghee-cd235f2c-1119-4002-b756-61e2983b0232","title":"TTD files plaint against AR Dairy for supplying adulterated ghee to Tirupati temple","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2024-09-25","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/andhra-pradesh/ttd-files-plaint-against-ar-dairy-for-supplying-adulterated-ghee-to-tirupati-temple-1825945","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.35767063,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":3,"claim_statuses":["lab_confirmed"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["show-cause notices to AR Dairy Foods"],"locations":["India, Tirupati"],"accepted_triplet_count":7,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":17,"excerpt":"Advertisement Tirupati: TTD has filed a police complaint against Tamil Nadu-based AR Dairy Foods Pvt Ltd, accusing the company of supplying adulterated ghee for use in the preparation of its laddu prasadam. The...","search_text":"$16e"},{"article_id":"add15855-56e0-4264-819c-b8e8110846aa","slug":"ghee-add15855-56e0-4264-819c-b8e8110846aa","title":"Concerns Over Ghee Quality at Srikalahasti Temple after Tirumala Scandal","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2024-09-25","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/andhra-pradesh/concerns-over-ghee-quality-at-srikalahasti-temple-after-tirumala-scandal-1825806","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.9,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":["adulterated ghee"],"actions":["inspections of the ghee"],"locations":["Srikalahasti, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":0,"excerpt":"Tirupati: Concern over suspected use of adulterated ghee in temple prasadam has escalated, with complaints that this could be happening in the Srikalahasti Temple and several other shrines across Andhra Pradesh. The...","search_text":"$16f"},{"article_id":"6ee56cf3-78f2-4420-bede-08f76397b2fb","slug":"ghee-6ee56cf3-78f2-4420-bede-08f76397b2fb","title":"TTD files police complaint against firm for suppling adulterated ghee","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2024-09-25","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/india-news/ttd-files-police-complaint-against-firm-for-suppling-adulterated-ghee-101727265799710.html","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.29432458,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["vegetable fat","animal fat"],"actions":["police complaint","show-cause notices","special investigation team (SIT)"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"TTD files police complaint against firm for suppling adulterated ghee he complaint was lodged with the Tirupati town police after the government set up a special investigation team (SIT) HYDERABAD: The Tirumala Tirupati...","search_text":"$170"},{"article_id":"55552c00-e696-4ac2-951e-156364cb1337","slug":"ghee-55552c00-e696-4ac2-951e-156364cb1337","title":"Tirupati Prasadam row: TTD lodges police complaint against AR Dairy Foods for supplying adulterated ghee with animal fats | Vijayawada News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-09-25","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/vijayawada/tirupati-prasadam-row-ttd-lodges-police-complaint-against-ar-dairy-foods-for-supplying-ghee-adulterated-with-animal-fats/articleshow/113674467.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.20963389,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["lab_confirmed"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal fats","fish oil","lard","palm oil","beef tallow"],"actions":["police complaint","blacklisting","Special Investigation Team investigation"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":9,"excerpt":"TIRUPATI: Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams lodged a police complaint against Tamil Nadu-based AR dairy foods private limited, located in Dindugal, for supplying ghee adulterated with animal fats to the Tirupati trust. It...","search_text":"$171"},{"article_id":"34b8b88f-e283-46cd-ba6e-f373dc3d4395","slug":"ghee-34b8b88f-e283-46cd-ba6e-f373dc3d4395","title":"FSSAI mulls state-of-the-art food lab in Tirumala","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2024-09-25","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/andhra-pradesh/fssai-mulls-state-of-the-art-food-lab-in-tirumala-1825960","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.15492024,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["allegation"],"locations":["India, Tirumala"],"accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"Tirupati: To improve food safety at one of India's most revered pilgrimage sites, the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) is considering the establishment of a state-of-the-art laboratory in Tirumala....","search_text":"$172"},{"article_id":"23ff1efe-782a-4174-8f33-41a3ff0e8c44","slug":"ghee-23ff1efe-782a-4174-8f33-41a3ff0e8c44","title":"Campaign to curb adulteration in desi ghee, butter launched across Uttarakhand","source":"indiasnews.net","date":"2024-09-25","url":"https://www.indiasnews.net/news/274634407/campaign-to-curb-adulteration-in-desi-ghee-butter-launched-across-uttarakhand","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["ghee","butter"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["Campaign to curb adulteration in desi ghee and butter"],"locations":["Dehradun, Uttarakhand, India"],"primary_state":"Uttarakhand","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":8,"excerpt":"Dehradun (Uttarakhand) [India], September 25(ANI): On the instructions of Chief Minister Pushkar Singh Dhami and Health Minister Dr. Dhan Singh Rawat, the Food Safety and Drug Controller Department has started a...","search_text":"$173"},{"article_id":"ef391115-fde1-44aa-ab00-abb8e2e7ec82","slug":"ghee-ef391115-fde1-44aa-ab00-abb8e2e7ec82","title":"FSSAI Issues Notice to Ghee Supplier","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2024-09-24","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/andhra-pradesh/fssai-issues-notice-to-ghee-supplier-1825588","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.34908038,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["fish oil"],"actions":["show-cause notice"],"locations":["Tirupati, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Tirupati: The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) has issued a show-cause notice to A.R. Dairy Foods Private Limited, based in Tamil Nadu, for allegedly supplying adulterated ghee to the Tirumala...","search_text":"$174"},{"article_id":"4299b01d-c5ab-4283-ae2d-31aa1fdbbfec","slug":"ghee-4299b01d-c5ab-4283-ae2d-31aa1fdbbfec","title":"Tirupati laddu row: FSSAI issues show cause notice to ghee supplier","source":"siasat.com","date":"2024-09-24","url":"https://www.siasat.com/tirupati-laddu-row-fssai-issues-show-cause-notice-to-ghee-supplier-3101731/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.31824333,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["show_cause_notice"],"locations":["India, Tirupati"],"accepted_triplet_count":5,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) has issued a show cause notice to Tamil Nadu-based A R Dairy Foods Private Limited for allegedly supplying adulterated ghee to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams...","search_text":"$175"},{"article_id":"3401730f-3850-4c7d-884f-dcdb1d086c42","slug":"ghee-3401730f-3850-4c7d-884f-dcdb1d086c42","title":"Yogi Govt Mandates Nameplates At Food Shops In UP, Enforces Stricter Food Safety Regulations","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2024-09-24","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/india/up-government-mandates-nameplates-at-food-shops-enforces-stricter-food-safety-regulations","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.9,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.28178017,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee","prasad"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["adulterated ghee"],"actions":[],"locations":["Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"In response to alarming incidents of food adulteration across the country, Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath has instructed state authorities to take strict and immediate action against those tampering with...","search_text":"$176"},{"article_id":"22bf4101-c33b-4711-b6e3-379968f7c217","slug":"ghee-22bf4101-c33b-4711-b6e3-379968f7c217","title":"FSSAI Issues Show Cause Notice to Ghee Supplier Over Adulteration Allegations in Tirupati Laddu","source":"etemaaddaily.com","date":"2024-09-24","url":"https://www.en.etemaaddaily.com/world/national/fssai-issues-show-cause-notice-to-ghee-supplier-over-adulteration-allegations-in-tirupati-laddu:161614","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.5692769,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["show_cause_notice"],"locations":["Tirupati, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Urdu Matrimonials Classifieds World Business Sports Entertainment Health Crime Edu and Jobs Politics Photos Videos Menu Home > World > National Hyderabad National International Specials Thu 01 Jan 1970 Share Tweet No...","search_text":"$177"},{"article_id":"f319102d-533a-41ff-9f08-6bda6778bb7e","slug":"ghee-f319102d-533a-41ff-9f08-6bda6778bb7e","title":"Tirupati laddu row: FSSAI issues show cause notice to ghee supplier, asks why its...","source":"dnaindia.com","date":"2024-09-23","url":"https://www.dnaindia.com/india/report-tirupati-laddu-row-fssai-issues-show-cause-notice-to-ghee-supplier-a-r-dairy-food-private-ltd-3109244","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.19556282,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":["substandard ghee"],"actions":["show cause notice"],"locations":["Dindigul, Tamil Nadu, India"],"primary_state":"Tamil Nadu","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"INDIA The regulator asked the firm to send its reply by September 23 failing which it said suitable action will be initiated as per the Food Safety and Standards Act 2006 and Regulations. In the wake of Tirupati Laddu...","search_text":"$178"},{"article_id":"e446ef0a-2a74-42bf-bcd6-2b793506650e","slug":"ghee-e446ef0a-2a74-42bf-bcd6-2b793506650e","title":"TTD to conduct santhi homam amid concerns over ghee quality for Srivari laddu","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2024-09-23","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/andhra-pradesh/2024/Sep/23/ttd-to-conduct-santhi-homam-amid-concerns-over-ghee-quality-for-srivari-laddu","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.26061138,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal fat"],"actions":["lab_setup"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"TIRUPATI: Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) Executive Officer J Shyamala Rao explained that a Santhi Homam will be conducted on Monday from 6 AM to 10 AM at Yagasala near Bangaru Bavi (Golden Well) to address...","search_text":"$179"},{"article_id":"7c914cb3-8ba1-4768-ac56-a051b75a6e8b","slug":"ghee-7c914cb3-8ba1-4768-ac56-a051b75a6e8b","title":"Health Ministry issues show-cause notice to ghee supplier after Tirupati laddu row","source":"thehindubusinessline.com","date":"2024-09-23","url":"https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/news/national/health-ministry-issues-show-cause-notice-to-ghee-supplier-after-tirupati-laddu-row/article68674234.ece","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.42635604,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["show-cause notice"],"locations":["India, Tirupati"],"accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":10,"excerpt":"The Health Ministry has issued a show-cause notice to one of the companies that supplied ghee to the Tirupati temple, sources said. The notice has been sent by the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI),...","search_text":"$17a"},{"article_id":"75f7eb04-35fe-48ce-af4a-d0ccf3067076","slug":"ghee-75f7eb04-35fe-48ce-af4a-d0ccf3067076","title":"FSSAI sends show cause notice to company supplying ghee to Tirupati temple","source":"indianexpress.com","date":"2024-09-23","url":"https://indianexpress.com/article/india/tirupati-temple-fssai-show-cause-notice-ghee-company-9584336/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.28402737,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":["animal fat"],"actions":["show cause notice"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"FSSAI sends show cause notice to company supplying ghee to Tirupati temple A R Dairy has been asked to file a reply by Monday, “failing which suitable action will be initiated as per food safety and standards act 2006...","search_text":"$17b"},{"article_id":"6721b632-2b4f-492a-840d-bb05d2a9f1af","slug":"ghee-6721b632-2b4f-492a-840d-bb05d2a9f1af","title":"Tirupati laddu row: Food safety regulator notice to ghee supplier","source":"rediff.com","date":"2024-09-23","url":"https://www.rediff.com/news/report/tirupati-laddu-row-food-safety-regulator-notice-to-ghee-supplier/20240923.htm","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.15063766,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":["animal fat"],"actions":["show_cause_notice"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":8,"excerpt":"The country's food safety regulator has issued a show cause notice to a Tamil Nadu-based firm for allegedly supplying substandard ghee to temple authority Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam even as the chorus for a thorough...","search_text":"$17c"},{"article_id":"471bc3da-bbd4-417c-875a-595a713be7fd","slug":"ghee-471bc3da-bbd4-417c-875a-595a713be7fd","title":"Food safety authority issues show-cause notice to firm on contamination in Tirupati laddus","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2024-09-23","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/food-safety-authority-issues-show-cause-notice-to-firm-on-contamination-in-tirupati-laddus/article68674512.ece","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.16517331,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["foreign fats"],"actions":["show-cause notice"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":13,"excerpt":"The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), the government’s food regulatory authority under the Health Ministry, has issued a show-cause notice to A.R. Dairy, one of the companies which supplied ghee to...","search_text":"$17d"},{"article_id":"4469e268-1b01-49b7-a436-ea4a88ba6269","slug":"ghee-4469e268-1b01-49b7-a436-ea4a88ba6269","title":"Tirupati laddu row: FSSAI issues show cause notice to ghee supplier","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2024-09-23","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/nation/2024/Sep/23/tirupati-laddu-row-fssai-issues-show-cause-notice-to-ghee-supplier-2","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.30086441,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["show cause notice"],"locations":["India, Tirupati"],"accepted_triplet_count":6,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"NEW DELHI: India’s food regulator has issued a show cause notice to a Tamil Nadu-based company, which supplied ghee to Tirupati Balaji temple for making laddoos after animal fat was detected in four of its samples,...","search_text":"$17e"},{"article_id":"eac2c9bd-6ddc-48dc-92e0-405c318acfb0","slug":"ghee-eac2c9bd-6ddc-48dc-92e0-405c318acfb0","title":"Caught in Tirupati laddu row, firm that supplied ghee: ‘Our samples first tested at national labs’","source":"indianexpress.com","date":"2024-09-22","url":"https://indianexpress.com/article/india/caught-in-tirupati-laddu-row-firm-that-supplied-ghee-our-samples-first-tested-at-national-labs-9581216/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"event_count":2,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["testing"],"locations":["India, Tirupati"],"accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":9,"excerpt":"Caught in Tirupati laddu row, firm that supplied ghee: ‘Our samples first tested at national labs’ Kannan, a quality control officer at the Dindigul-based AR Dairy Food, denied allegations of adulteration and said there...","search_text":"$17f"},{"article_id":"adad636e-6844-49cb-bb07-54ff4f1a044f","slug":"ghee-adad636e-6844-49cb-bb07-54ff4f1a044f","title":"Naidu's Tirupati Laddu Claim Under The Scanner As TTD Says Adulterated Ghee That Arrived In July Never Used: Report","source":"swarajyamag.com","date":"2024-09-22","url":"https://swarajyamag.com/news-brief/naidus-tirupati-laddu-claim-under-the-scanner-as-ttd-says-adulterated-ghee-that-arrived-in-july-never-used-report","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.1244995,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["fish oil","lard","beef tallow","vegetable oils"],"actions":["returned to supplier"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":5,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Amid the ongoing controversy surrounding alleged use of animal fat in Tirupati laddus, the Tirumala Tirupati Deasthanams (TTD), the trusts that manages the temple, has reportedly denied that adulterated ghee that...","search_text":"$180"},{"article_id":"a96905fe-9d68-4a0c-9c4e-ce250411fcd9","slug":"ghee-a96905fe-9d68-4a0c-9c4e-ce250411fcd9","title":"Could Tirupati’s problems help clarify the history of ghee adulteration?","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-09-22","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/blogs/onmyplate/could-tirupatis-problems-help-clarify-the-history-of-ghee-adulteration/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["Fine of ₹50"],"locations":["India"],"accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":16,"excerpt":"In November 1886, The Times of India reported a case at the Fort Police Court, of Poonamchand Dueera charged with selling adulterated ghee. He was an odd defendant. When his advocate Mr Hurryshunker asked if good ghee...","search_text":"$181"},{"article_id":"a18ba308-f8ab-4590-b466-daf80aa2b59c","slug":"ghee-a18ba308-f8ab-4590-b466-daf80aa2b59c","title":"Andhra: MLAs Ganta and Vishnu raise concern over quality of Simhachalam temple ghee","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2024-09-22","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/andhra-pradesh/2024/Sep/22/andhra-mlas-ganta-and-vishnu-raise-concern-over-quality-of-simhachalam-temple-ghee","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.24247464,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["Vanaspati","flower oil","palm oil"],"actions":["inspection","seizure"],"locations":["Visakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"VISAKHAPATNAM: In the wake of widespread scrutiny following allegations of adulteration in cow ghee used in the preparation of Tirumala Laddus, Bheemili TDP MLA Ganta Srinivas Rao and Visakhapatnam North Constituency...","search_text":"$182"},{"article_id":"73066633-67a8-4240-8c5a-3c4ae29b486d","slug":"ghee-73066633-67a8-4240-8c5a-3c4ae29b486d","title":"Bhumana terms CM's claims over adulterated ghee with animal fats as baseless, demands CBI probe | Amaravati News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-09-22","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/amaravati/bhumana-terms-cms-claims-over-adulterated-ghee-with-animal-fats-as-baseless-demands-cbi-probe/articleshow/113576589.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.9,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.19695324,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["vegetable oils","animal fats"],"actions":["CBI probe demanded","contractor blacklisted"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"TIRUPATI: Former Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams chairman Bhumana Karunakar Reddy termed Chief minister Nara Chandrababu Naidu's claims over the use of adulterated ghee with animal fats in the preparation of the highly...","search_text":"$183"},{"article_id":"3f674523-5416-4b89-8cab-fe3ddf3c9e7e","slug":"ghee-3f674523-5416-4b89-8cab-fe3ddf3c9e7e","title":"Tirupati Laddu ghee supplier's defense: ‘Fish oil expensive’","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2024-09-22","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/india-news/tirupati-laddu-row-fish-oil-more-expensive-accused-ghee-supplier-refutes-allegations-101726973256605.html","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.39284625,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal fat"],"actions":["legal action"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"Tirupati Laddu ghee supplier's defense: ‘Fish oil expensive’ Tirumala Laddu row: A day after the TTD initiated legal action against the firm, the employee refuted the allegation that fish oil was used to prepare ghee....","search_text":"$184"},{"article_id":"aed9cf49-b6d3-4952-8acb-37e1eae1c31a","slug":"ghee-aed9cf49-b6d3-4952-8acb-37e1eae1c31a","title":"'Animal fat' in Tirupati laddus: Who supplied ghee to Balaji temple and why did Nandini opt out? Who said what?","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2024-09-21","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/india-news/animal-fat-tirupati-laddus-who-supplied-ghee-to-temple-and-why-did-nandini-opt-out-who-said-what-101726878145316.html","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"provisional","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.1511004,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":3,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["blacklisting"],"locations":["India, Tirupati"],"accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":17,"excerpt":"'Animal fat' in Tirupati laddus: Who supplied ghee to Balaji temple and why did Nandini opt out? Who said what? Tirupati laddus row: Health minister JP Nadda sought a report on the matter from Andhra Pradesh government...","search_text":"$185"},{"article_id":"8e4f2f4a-8039-4ba0-9b6d-beecad106136","slug":"ghee-8e4f2f4a-8039-4ba0-9b6d-beecad106136","title":"Tirupati Laddu Row: Never Supplied Ghee to TTD, says Amul","source":"deccanchronicle.com","date":"2024-09-21","url":"https://www.deccanchronicle.com/southern-states/andhra-pradesh/tirupati-laddu-row-never-supplied-ghee-to-ttd-says-amul-1824970","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.29128995,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal fat"],"actions":["court_inquiry"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":5,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Dairy giant Amul on Friday clarified that they have never supplied ghee to Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam (TTD) for the preparation of laddu. In a statement, Amul said, “This is in reference to some social media posts...","search_text":"$186"},{"article_id":"706246bb-b5c8-4d73-81fa-2e93d040c762","slug":"ghee-706246bb-b5c8-4d73-81fa-2e93d040c762","title":"CBI probe sought into adulterated ghee issue","source":"thehansindia.com","date":"2024-09-21","url":"https://www.thehansindia.com/andhra-pradesh/cbi-probe-sought-into-adulterated-ghee-issue-908545","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.9,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee","Tirupati Prasadam laddu"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["ghee"],"actions":["investigation_sought"],"locations":["Vijayawada, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":0,"excerpt":"Vijayawada: Bharatiya Chaitanya Yuvajana Party (BCY) president Ramachandra Yadav sharply reacting to the allegations of adulterated ghee in the preparation of Tirupati Prasadam laddu demanded thorough investigation into...","search_text":"$187"},{"article_id":"438c4f31-19bd-4ff3-bed4-035569ec6cbf","slug":"ghee-438c4f31-19bd-4ff3-bed4-035569ec6cbf","title":"FDA seize suspected adulterated food items worth  ₹ 14.35 lakh","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2024-09-21","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/cities/pune-news/fda-seize-suspected-adulterated-food-items-worth-14-35-lakh-101726859521928.html","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.5509513,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["ghee","vanaspati ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Pune, Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"FDA seize suspected adulterated food items worth ₹ 14.35 lakh FDA Pune seized ₹14.35 lakh worth of suspected adulterated food during the Ganesh Festival, conducting inspections across multiple districts for public...","search_text":"$188"},{"article_id":"3865528e-cbb8-4615-af7d-f9ab01e9fe4d","slug":"ghee-3865528e-cbb8-4615-af7d-f9ab01e9fe4d","title":"Laddu Prasadam: Action sought against firms which supplied adulterated ghee","source":"thehansindia.com","date":"2024-09-21","url":"https://www.thehansindia.com/andhra-pradesh/laddu-prasadam-action-sought-against-firms-which-supplied-adulterated-ghee-908581","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.9,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.22305472,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee","laddu prasadam"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["adulterated ghee"],"actions":["action sought"],"locations":["Guntur, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":0,"excerpt":"Guntur: BJP State secretary Nagothu Ramesh Naidu said use of adulterated ghee for making Tirumala laddu prasadam hurt the sentiments of the devotees. Addressing the media at BJP district office in Guntur city on Friday,...","search_text":"$189"},{"article_id":"f58af8d2-a271-4586-b2b4-1b399c9f84de","slug":"ghee-f58af8d2-a271-4586-b2b4-1b399c9f84de","title":"TTD blacklists supplier of adulterated ghee, warns of criminal action","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2024-09-20","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/andhra-pradesh/ttd-blacklists-supplier-of-adulterated-ghee-warns-of-criminal-action/article68664222.ece","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"provisional","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.52695298,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["recall_triggered"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["blacklist"],"locations":["India, Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD)"],"accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":8,"excerpt":"The Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) Executive Officer, J. Shyamala Rao, on Friday (September 20, 2024) categorically said that the Tamil Nadu-based AR Dairy Food Private Limited, a key supplier of ghee to the...","search_text":"$18a"},{"article_id":"db8eb9e3-f6e6-4be4-b6d2-d135a6c3e9ac","slug":"ghee-db8eb9e3-f6e6-4be4-b6d2-d135a6c3e9ac","title":"Tirupati Prasad Controversy: TN Dairy Company Denies Its Ghee Was Impure","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2024-09-20","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/india/tirupati-prasad-controversy-tn-dairy-company-denies-its-ghee-was-impure","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.9,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.23244025,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal fat"],"actions":["inspection","sample collection"],"locations":["Dindigul, Tamil Nadu, India"],"primary_state":"Tamil Nadu","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"Chennai: Amidst the row over animal fat including beef fat allegedly having been used in the ghee used in the preparation of laddu prasadam served to devotees in Tirupati temple, a dairy company in Tamil Nadu, which had...","search_text":"$18b"},{"article_id":"d7f7d93d-fda2-48cd-89a3-7b5c35ec6480","slug":"ghee-d7f7d93d-fda2-48cd-89a3-7b5c35ec6480","title":"Amul clarifies it never supplied ghee to Tirupati Balaji amid animal fat row","source":"opindia.com","date":"2024-09-20","url":"https://www.opindia.com/2024/09/amul-clarifies-it-never-supplied-ghee-to-tirupati-balaji-amid-animal-fat-row/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.28013579,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["fish oil","beef tallow","vegetable oils"],"actions":[],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":8,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":9,"excerpt":"Amid the controversy over the presence of animal fat like beef fat, pig fat and fish oil in ghee used to make the famous laddus of Tirupati temple, dairy giant Amul has clarified it never supplied ghee to the temple....","search_text":"$18c"},{"article_id":"d156577c-5001-4f1b-90f7-d7b21a37497b","slug":"ghee-d156577c-5001-4f1b-90f7-d7b21a37497b","title":"Tirupati laddu row: Ghee supplier to Tirumala denies &#8216;beef tallow&#8217; adulteration claim","source":"financialexpress.com","date":"2024-09-20","url":"https://www.financialexpress.com/india-news/tirupati-laddu-row-ghee-supplier-to-tirumala-denies-beef-tallow-adulteration-claim/3616788/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.11407337,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["vegetable fat","animal fat"],"actions":["blacklisting and penalising the supplier","formation of expert committee"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":10,"excerpt":"Animal fat row: As the controversy over the claim that animal fat was being used for the preparation of Tirupati laddus snowballed, A R Dairy Food Private Limited, which supplied ghee to the Tirumala Tirupati...","search_text":"$18d"},{"article_id":"c2853c18-cc20-43b6-bd36-3b77725ba1d7","slug":"ghee-c2853c18-cc20-43b6-bd36-3b77725ba1d7","title":"Dindigul Dairy Firm Refutes Charge It Supplied Adulterated Ghee To Ttd | Madurai News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-09-20","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/madurai/dindigul-dairy-firm-refutes-charge-it-supplied-adulterated-ghee-to-ttd/articleshow/113532120.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal fat"],"actions":["inspection","probe"],"locations":["Dindigul, Tamil Nadu, India"],"primary_state":"Tamil Nadu","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":0,"excerpt":"Madurai: A R Dairy Food Pvt Ltd, a Dindigul-based dairy company, has refuted the charge that it supplied adulterated ghee to Thirumala Tirupati Devasthanam following allegations that the ghee used to make Tirupati...","search_text":"$18e"},{"article_id":"102a4953-33a2-4842-827e-987e3bb6ce7a","slug":"ghee-102a4953-33a2-4842-827e-987e3bb6ce7a","title":"Tirupati laddu row: CM Chandrababu Naidu accuses YSRCP of compromising sacredness of laddus with &#8216;adulterated&#8217; ghee","source":"financialexpress.com","date":"2024-09-20","url":"https://www.financialexpress.com/india-news/tirupati-laddu-row-cm-chandrababu-naidu-accuses-ysrcp-of-compromising-sacredness-of-laddus-with-adulterated-ghee/3616993/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.16492105,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal fat"],"actions":["blacklisting of contractor"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"TDP supremo and Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu on Friday launched a scathing attack on the YSRCP, accusing its previous government of compromising the sacredness of the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams...","search_text":"$18f"},{"article_id":"0a23e582-3dac-4091-bf36-a08d511a3763","slug":"ghee-0a23e582-3dac-4091-bf36-a08d511a3763","title":"Major Crackdown: Over 1,000 kg Adulterated Ghee Seized, Sanchi To Lodge FIR","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2024-09-12","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/indore/major-crackdown-over-1000-kg-adulterated-ghee-seized-sanchi-to-lodge-fir","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.6740304,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit"],"adulterants":["counterfeit ghee"],"actions":["seizure","FIR Filing"],"locations":["Indore, Madhya Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Madhya Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Indore (Madhya Pradesh): In a significant move led by the Food Safety Administration Department, a joint team carried out a surprise inspection in the Malharganj area, leading to the seizure of 1,015 kg of counterfeit...","search_text":"$190"},{"article_id":"oil-76b9943656157edc","slug":"oil-76b9943656157edc","title":"Poor quality oil found in kits distributed among tribes, fine of ₹7 lakh imposed on company","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2024-09-05","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/kerala/poor-quality-oil-found-in-kits-distributed-among-tribes-fine-of-7-lakh-imposed-on-company/article68609646.ece","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["coconut oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","mislabeling","unsafe_food"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["Fine of ₹7 lakh"],"locations":["Thodupuzha, Idukki, Kerala, India"],"primary_state":"Kerala","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"The Idukki Subcollector has imposed a fine of ₹7 lakh on Star Foods, a private coconut oil brand, for distributing substandard coconut oil to tribal families in Idukki. The fine has been imposed on the company’s owner...","search_text":"$191"},{"article_id":"oil-21d4880656b0c52f","slug":"oil-21d4880656b0c52f","title":"FSSAI seizes 14000 litres of oil Kanpur festive season","source":"healthandme.com","date":"2024-09-01","url":"https://www.healthandme.com/nutrition/kanpur-food-adulteration-fssai-seizes-14000l-of-oil-1320kg-rotten-dates-and-more-ahead-of-festive-season-article-153707864","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.899515577163256,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":9,"excerpt":"Credits: FSSAI and Canva After Indore's Bhagirathpura food contamination and Horlicks adulteration in Odisha, another news of food adulteration comes from the state of Uttar Pradesh where UP Food Safety and Drug...","search_text":"$192"},{"article_id":"97c9d44f-1ca4-489d-a786-dc23f1fe1175","slug":"ghee-97c9d44f-1ca4-489d-a786-dc23f1fe1175","title":"Food Safety Officers Uncover Trend of Selling Fake Products | Jaipur News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-08-29","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/jaipur/food-safety-officers-uncover-trend-of-selling-fake-products/articleshow/112879595.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.75549834,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit"],"adulterants":["vegetable oil"],"actions":["FIR filed","seizure"],"locations":["Jaipur, Rajasthan, India"],"primary_state":"Rajasthan","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"Jaipur: Food safety officers have unravelled a new trend in selling fake products. Those accused of selling fake food items are spending big bucks to create such products. Authorities said they even get bar codes and...","search_text":"$193"},{"article_id":"oil-b434a85e1e9196d0","slug":"oil-b434a85e1e9196d0","title":"FDA Raid on 21 Food Establishments in Kanpur","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-08-18","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/kanpur/fda-raid-on-21-food-establishments-in-kanpur/articleshow/112599302.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.92,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["mustard oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","sample_collection"],"locations":["Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Kanpur: A team from Food Security and Drug Administration (FDA) department conducted a raid on Friday at M/s MA Enterprises in Dada Nagar, resulting in the seizure of the establishment due to the absence of a food...","search_text":"$194"},{"article_id":"eb84cbb3-24d1-4565-9ec1-8bd3b9d4bec9","slug":"ghee-eb84cbb3-24d1-4565-9ec1-8bd3b9d4bec9","title":"129kg of spurious ghee seized in Vadodara | Vadodara News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-08-11","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/vadodara/129kg-of-spurious-ghee-seized-in-vadodara/articleshow/112436304.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["hydrogenated vegetable oil"],"actions":["seizure","raid"],"locations":["Vadodara, Gujarat, India"],"primary_state":"Gujarat","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"129kg of spurious ghee seized Vadodara: Food safety officials of the Vadodara Municipal Corporation (VMC) raided a private dairy in the Gotri area of the city on Friday night and seized 129kg of ghee that is suspected...","search_text":"$195"},{"article_id":"oil-fba2e5ff157abb74","slug":"oil-fba2e5ff157abb74","title":"AMC seizes 180kg of âedible oilâ, seals 5 units","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-07-28","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/ahmedabad/amc-seizes-180kg-of-edible-oil-seals-5-units/articleshow/112072084.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","sealing"],"locations":["Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India"],"primary_state":"Gujarat","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Ahmedabad: A team of the civic body’s health department seized 180 kilograms of edible oil of various brands and sealed five establishments selling substandard food items between July 14 and Saturday. The health...","search_text":"$196"},{"article_id":"5245dc0a-5d68-4a00-ad89-6255f3bee930","slug":"ghee-5245dc0a-5d68-4a00-ad89-6255f3bee930","title":"TTD blacklists contractor for supplying substandard ghee | Amaravati News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-07-23","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/amaravati/ttd-blacklists-contractor-for-supplying-substandard-ghee/articleshow/111967824.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.17948467,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["lab_confirmed"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["vegetable oils"],"actions":["blacklisting"],"locations":["Tirupati, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":5,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"TIRUPATI: Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams has blacklisted a contractor for supplying substandard ghee to the Tirupati trust. TTD's action comes as a stern warning to all the suppliers of various ingredients involved in...","search_text":"$197"},{"article_id":"oil-06d5928124689ba0","slug":"oil-06d5928124689ba0","title":"Raid Conducted on Fast Food Centers and Hotels for Using Adulterated Oils","source":"thehansindia.com","date":"2024-07-11","url":"https://www.thehansindia.com/andhra-pradesh/raid-conducted-on-fast-food-centers-and-hotels-for-using-adulterated-oils-891217","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.3897,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["adulterated oils"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["warning"],"locations":["Badwel, India"],"accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"In a surprise inspection carried out by the Municipal Commissioner and Food Safety Officers, several fast food centers and hotels under Badwel Municipality were found to be using adulterated oils and tasting salt,...","search_text":"$198"},{"article_id":"oil-e1cd585e16b9635b","slug":"oil-e1cd585e16b9635b","title":"FSSAI issues notices to 55 edible oil manufacturers | Ahmedabad News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-07-09","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/ahmedabad/fssai-issues-notices-to-55-edible-oil-manufacturers/articleshow/111591411.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.1197170671829318,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["contamination","prohibited_additive"],"adulterants":["reused tin containers"],"actions":["Notice to 55 edible oil manufacturers"],"locations":["Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India"],"primary_state":"Gujarat","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Ahmedabad: FSSAI Gujarat issued notices to 55 edible oil manufacturers, restraining them from using old tins. These 55 include almost all refiners and re-packers. Sources said the Gujarat food and drug control...","search_text":"$199"},{"article_id":"oil-846611108e27fafb","slug":"oil-846611108e27fafb","title":"From the pages of The Hindu, July 4, 1974: Edible oil adulterated with used motor oil","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2024-07-04","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/archives/from-the-pages-of-the-hindu-july-4-1974-edible-oil-adulterated-with-used-motor-oil/article68364441.ece","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.7144802381536722,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["used motor oil"],"actions":["written to Ministry of Petroleum and Chemicals","referred to Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission"],"locations":["India"],"accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"New Delhi, July 3: An all-India sample survey conducted by Consumer Council of India has revealed that used motor oil is being utilised for adulteration with edible oils, hair oils etc, after being refined. On the basis...","search_text":"$19a"},{"article_id":"fee252e0-d871-44c1-8917-1fd2d148377a","slug":"ghee-fee252e0-d871-44c1-8917-1fd2d148377a","title":"Duplicate ghee factory busted | Surat News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-06-24","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/surat/duplicate-ghee-factory-busted/articleshow/111215881.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["recall_triggered"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["India, Onchi village, Navsari"],"accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":0,"excerpt":"Surat: Navsari police have busted a duplicate ghee-making factory that was operating from Onchi village. The duplicate cow ghee was being made by mixing palm oil, colouring and flavouring agents. Based on a tip-off, the...","search_text":"$19b"},{"article_id":"e6d36e44-00e2-4f9e-95b1-e892e44117eb","slug":"ghee-e6d36e44-00e2-4f9e-95b1-e892e44117eb","title":"FDCA Seizes â_x0082_¹14 Lakh Worth of Adulterated Ghee and Palmolein Oil in Navsari | Ahmedabad News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-06-24","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/ahmedabad/adulterated-ghee-palmolein-oil-worth-14l-seized/articleshow/111215219.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8919619,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["ghee","palmolein oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["palmolein oil"],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Navsari, Gujarat, India"],"primary_state":"Gujarat","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Adulterated ghee, palmolein oil worth â¹14L seized Gandhinagar: The state Food and Drugs Control Administration (FDCA) raided a unit in Navsari and seized suspected adulterated ghee and palmolein oil worth Rs 14 lakh, a...","search_text":"$19c"},{"article_id":"f5653eaf-7d13-4c91-93c7-e30daca2ec3a","slug":"ghee-f5653eaf-7d13-4c91-93c7-e30daca2ec3a","title":"Food safety team seizes fake ghee at Jhotwara retail mart | Jaipur News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-06-23","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/jaipur/food-safety-team-seizes-fake-ghee-at-jhotwara-retail-mart/articleshow/111198853.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["counterfeit Saras ghee"],"actions":["seizure","FIR"],"locations":["Jaipur, Rajasthan, India"],"primary_state":"Rajasthan","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Jaipur: During an inspection at a retail mart in Jhotwara on Saturday, a team of food safety officers found two litres of counterfeit Saras ghee, which was seized. Representatives from Saras Dairy also arrived at the...","search_text":"$19d"},{"article_id":"2719a94d-d523-4fef-bfd9-a1bef16dd951","slug":"ghee-2719a94d-d523-4fef-bfd9-a1bef16dd951","title":"FIR registered against retail mart, company in adulterated ghee case | Jaipur News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-06-22","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/jaipur/fir-registered-against-retail-mart-company-in-adulterated-ghee-case/articleshow/111178942.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit"],"adulterants":["fake ghee"],"actions":["FIR registered","seizure","notices issued"],"locations":["Jaipur, Rajasthan, India"],"primary_state":"Rajasthan","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Jaipur: A day after seizures of adulterated ghee of fake brands of Saras and Pro-Vedic, govt-run Saras Dairy on Friday lodged FIRs against D-Mart and Khandelwal and Company for copyright violation. One FIR each was...","search_text":"$19e"},{"article_id":"268e5866-7aea-4546-934f-f105a70b1096","slug":"ghee-268e5866-7aea-4546-934f-f105a70b1096","title":"450 litre spurious ghee seized from retail mart in city | Jaipur News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-06-21","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/jaipur/450-litre-spurious-ghee-seized-from-retail-mart-in-city/articleshow/111151772.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"event_count":2,"claim_statuses":["recall_triggered"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["India, Jaipur"],"accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"Jaipur: A team of food safety commissionerate on Thursday seized 450 litre of adulterated ghee during a raid at D-Mart store in Malviya Nagar under the âShuddha Aahar-Adulteration Par Vaar Abhiyanâ. The spurious ghee...","search_text":"$19f"},{"article_id":"oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","slug":"oil-3bd1cf9862ff569d","title":"Fake Edible Oil Ingredients: 6 harmful ingredients found in fake edible oil | - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-06-05","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/life-style/food-news/harmful-ingredients-in-fake-edible-oil/articleshow/110737364.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.692216452573848,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit","mislabeling"],"adulterants":["Argemone oil"],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Ajmer, Rajasthan, India"],"primary_state":"Rajasthan","accepted_triplet_count":6,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":18,"excerpt":"The global food industry has seen a worrying rise in the prevalence of counterfeit products, and edible oil is no exception. The use of fake edible oils, which often contain harmful ingredients, poses significant health...","search_text":"$1a0"},{"article_id":"oil-0d7b13a282f9b466","slug":"oil-0d7b13a282f9b466","title":"Health News: Warning signs of diabetes seen in morning, how to identify fake cooking oil, laptop related health issues, common signs of vitamin A deficiency, and more | - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-06-05","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/life-style/health-fitness/health-news/toi-health-news-morning-briefing-warning-signs-of-diabetes-seen-in-morning-how-to-identify-fake-cooking-oil-laptop-related-health-issues-common-signs-of-vitamin-a-deficiency-and-more/articleshow/110702015.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.2901291950930987,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["cooking oil"],"issue_types":["counterfeit","adulteration"],"adulterants":["fake cooking oil"],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Ajmer, Rajasthan, India"],"primary_state":"Rajasthan","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":0,"excerpt":"Read today's health news briefing here. Your morning dose of health updates, news and latest guidelines are all here: News18,000 fake cooking oil seized, how to identify such oils: Nearly 18,000 litres of fake cooking...","search_text":"$1a1"},{"article_id":"oil-63426d939d718e7f","slug":"oil-63426d939d718e7f","title":"How to identify fake cooking oil? (FSSAI recommended tips) - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-06-04","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/life-style/health-fitness/health-news/how-to-identify-fake-cooking-oil-fssai-recommended-tips/articleshow/110694766.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8945202964035499,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["cooking oil"],"issue_types":["mislabeling","adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Ajmer, Rajasthan, India"],"primary_state":"Rajasthan","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":17,"excerpt":"Nearly 18,000 litres of fake cooking oil was seized by the medical department in Ajmer, the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India ( FSSAI) has tweeted. \"About 18 thousand liters of misbranded edible oil was...","search_text":"$1a2"},{"article_id":"94faca18-b471-4748-8bab-f399641cedbd","slug":"ghee-94faca18-b471-4748-8bab-f399641cedbd","title":"Widespread food safety violations uncovered in Telangana hotels, dairy factories","source":"siasat.com","date":"2024-05-31","url":"https://www.siasat.com/widespread-food-safety-violations-uncovered-in-telangana-hotels-dairy-factories-3035825/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.19674815,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":["unlabeled"],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Rangareddy, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":11,"excerpt":"The Telangana food safety department has conducted more inspections at various hotels across the state and uncovered widespread violations of food safety and hygiene regulations. In Hanumakonda Hotel Ashoka An...","search_text":"$1a3"},{"article_id":"oil-7b8839ea47991949","slug":"oil-7b8839ea47991949","title":"Over 12,000 litre of âspuriousâ oil seized | Jaipur News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-05-22","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/jaipur/over-12000-litre-of-spurious-oil-seized/articleshow/110316417.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8477581365529225,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["Ranthambore brand mustard oil"],"issue_types":["substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Jaipur, Rajasthan, India"],"primary_state":"Rajasthan","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"Jaipur: Food Safety and Drug Control Commissionerate teams on Tuesday seized 6,683 litre of edible oil in Muhana Mandi and 6,000 litre at a factory in Niwai on suspicion of substandard quality. Health department...","search_text":"$1a4"},{"article_id":"b55fc156-b5e6-49b6-b4f1-e092d3b4f553","slug":"ghee-b55fc156-b5e6-49b6-b4f1-e092d3b4f553","title":"Seizure of 4,000L Substandard Ghee in Kota District | Jaipur News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-05-19","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/jaipur/seizure-of-4000l-substandard-ghee-in-kota-district/articleshow/110241473.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.91325097,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","mislabeling"],"adulterants":["substandard"],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Kota, Rajasthan, India"],"primary_state":"Rajasthan","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"Jaipur: The Food Safety and Drug Control Commission seized 4,000 litre of substandard ghee labelled 'Shri Saras' from Kota on Friday night, a day after confiscating 13,700 litre of the same ghee in Jaipur. Pankaj Ojha,...","search_text":"$1a5"},{"article_id":"oil-a0831d014f72baf3","slug":"oil-a0831d014f72baf3","title":"2 fall ill after consuming McDonald’s cheese and Theobroma cake","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-05-01","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/noida/2-fall-ill-after-consuming-mcdonalds-cheese-and-theobroma-cake/articleshow/109739869.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["palm oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","contamination"],"adulterants":[],"actions":[],"locations":["Noida, Gautam Buddha Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"NOIDA: Teams of food safety and drug administration collected samples of palm oil, cheese and mayonnaise from a McDonald’s outlet in Sector 18 and pineapple cake from Theobroma in Sector 104 following complaints from...","search_text":"$1a6"},{"article_id":"b3b632d3-bab8-43e4-9749-51b79e59f7dd","slug":"ghee-b3b632d3-bab8-43e4-9749-51b79e59f7dd","title":"Fdca Seizes 2,700 Litres Of Adulterated Ghee | Ahmedabad News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-04-20","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/ahmedabad/fdca-seizes-2700-litres-of-adulterated-ghee/articleshow/109447299.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Palanpur, Gujarat, India"],"primary_state":"Gujarat","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Ahmedabad: Gujarat state Food and Drug Control Administration (FDCA) team has seized a stock of around 2,700 litres of suspected adulterated ghee worth around Rs 17 lakh from Palanpur. The manufacturer had been caught...","search_text":"$1a7"},{"article_id":"948eda84-20a8-442d-8a0a-ffba051904a4","slug":"ghee-948eda84-20a8-442d-8a0a-ffba051904a4","title":"Duplicate Ghee Of Sumul Brand Seized | Surat News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-04-03","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/surat/duplicate-ghee-of-sumul-brand-seized/articleshow/108987277.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"provisional","validation_confidence":null,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","arrest","testing"],"locations":["India, Surat"],"accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Surat: Teams of Sumul dairy, Surat Municipal Corporation (SMC) and police raided a shop in the Kapodra area and seized duplicate being sold under the dairyâs brand name. The raid was carried out in Hasmukha Hanuman...","search_text":"$1a8"},{"article_id":"e6f33250-4650-42ce-96e8-87ce7eebc853","slug":"ghee-e6f33250-4650-42ce-96e8-87ce7eebc853","title":"Ghee Sample Fails Quality Test | Jaipur News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-03-22","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/jaipur/ghee-sample-fails-quality-test/articleshow/108690337.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["adulterated ghee"],"actions":["Improvement notice","seizure"],"locations":["Jaipur, Rajasthan, India"],"primary_state":"Rajasthan","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"Jaipur: In a surprise inspection of 21 milk and paneer shops in Shastri Nagarâs doodh mandi on Thursday, food safety officers found adulterated ghee being sold at the market. In addition to five samples of ghee, some...","search_text":"$1a9"},{"article_id":"1df33743-1016-49ce-981b-862125c0893f","slug":"ghee-1df33743-1016-49ce-981b-862125c0893f","title":"Life Imprisonment for Selling Duplicate Ghee of Prominent Brands in Kanpur | Kanpur News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-03-16","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/kanpur/life-imprisonment-for-selling-duplicate-ghee-of-prominent-brands-in-kanpur/articleshow/108536721.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.86458277,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit"],"adulterants":["vegetable refined oil","butter flavour"],"actions":["life imprisonment","fine"],"locations":["Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Kanpur: Additional district judge Ram Avatar Prasad on Thursday awarded life imprisonment to two accused for selling duplicate desi ghee of prominent companies. The court also slapped a fine of Rs 1.62 lakh on each. The...","search_text":"$1aa"},{"article_id":"oil-5413f17944743156","slug":"oil-5413f17944743156","title":"DCA raids clinics, seizes fake organic oils with false claims","source":"thehansindia.com","date":"2024-03-04","url":"https://www.thehansindia.com/telangana/dca-raids-clinics-seizes-fake-organic-oils-with-false-claims-862432","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.678,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["almond oil","walnut oil","kalonji oil"],"issue_types":["mislabeling","counterfeit"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Hyderabad, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Hyderabad: Telangana State Drugs Control Administration (DCA) seized 'aio organic almond oil, walnut oil, and kalonji oil' from a clinic in Shalibanda for promoting misleading health benefits claims. The raid targeted...","search_text":"$1ab"},{"article_id":"oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","slug":"oil-a74af7bad030eb8a","title":"MP: Spice Grinding Unit Sealed For Flouting Norms","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2024-02-25","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/indore/mp-spice-grinding-unit-sealed-for-flouting-norms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["soybean oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","mislabeling"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["sealing","confiscation"],"locations":["Amjhera, Dhar, Madhya Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Madhya Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"Amjhera (Madhya Pradesh): In a recent crackdown against adulteration, the food safety team in Dhar district sealed a spice grinding factory operating without a licence in Amjhera. Following the directives of Collector...","search_text":"$1ac"},{"article_id":"0facca96-d90c-4f21-ba98-356f7f6b1622","slug":"ghee-0facca96-d90c-4f21-ba98-356f7f6b1622","title":"10k Litre of Spurious Ghee Seized in Jaipur: Fake Ghee Operation Uncovered | Jaipur News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-02-22","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/jaipur/10k-litre-of-spurious-ghee-seized-in-jaipur-fake-ghee-operation-uncovered/articleshow/107898461.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["fake ghee"],"actions":["seizure","arrest"],"locations":["Jaipur, Rajasthan, India"],"primary_state":"Rajasthan","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Jaipur: As much as 10,465 litres of low-quality ghee packaged under reputed brands such as Krishna, Lotus, Mahan and Amul was seized at a warehouse in Vishwakarma police station area of the city, police said on...","search_text":"$1ad"},{"article_id":"cfd3be60-c380-4a63-8e12-5fd8af9b72bd","slug":"ghee-cfd3be60-c380-4a63-8e12-5fd8af9b72bd","title":"Food Safety Officers Seize 9,000kg of Spurious Ghee in Jaipur | Jaipur News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-02-21","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/jaipur/food-safety-officers-seize-9000kg-of-spurious-ghee-in-jaipur/articleshow/107867957.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","mislabeling"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","FIR filed"],"locations":["Jaipur, Rajasthan, India"],"primary_state":"Rajasthan","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Jaipur: In a crackdown on food adulteration, health department officers seized 9,000 kilograms of spurious ghee during a raid on Tuesday. The raid, conducted under \"Shudh Aahaar, Milawat Par Vaar\" campaign, targeted a...","search_text":"$1ae"},{"article_id":"oil-6e721139517af252","slug":"oil-6e721139517af252","title":"MP: 200 Litres Adulterated Mustard Oil Found In Jabalpur Oil Factory During Surprise Inspection","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2024-02-19","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/bhopal/mp-200-litres-adulterated-mustard-oil-found-in-jabalpur-oil-factory-during-surprise-inspection","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8136805913011256,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["mustard oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","contamination","mislabeling"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["sealing"],"locations":["Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Madhya Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"Jabalpur (Madhya Pradesh): A team of food inspectors sealed a Jabalpur based oil factory on Monday after discovering significant contamination and unsanitary conditions within the premises. A barrel containing 200...","search_text":"$1af"},{"article_id":"91aa9ca8-e7d7-4036-a22f-5c8c8e7fc2ce","slug":"ghee-91aa9ca8-e7d7-4036-a22f-5c8c8e7fc2ce","title":"2.5k Litre Of Spurious Ghee Seized In Pali | Jaipur News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2024-02-10","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/jaipur/2-5k-litre-of-spurious-ghee-seized-in-pali/articleshow/107572083.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":["hazardous chemicals"],"actions":["raid","seizure"],"locations":["Pali, Rajasthan, India"],"primary_state":"Rajasthan","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Jaipur: Over 2,500 litre of spurious ghee were recovered during a raid conducted by police in the Pali district on Thursday. Sources revealed that the police had received specific intelligence indicating the production...","search_text":"$1b0"},{"article_id":"892c7a97-bb6b-47a5-9402-8a5293acf25b","slug":"ghee-892c7a97-bb6b-47a5-9402-8a5293acf25b","title":"Bhiwandi Nizampur civic body seizes 15 kg of ghee mixed with animal fat","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2024-01-06","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/cities/mumbai-news/bhiwandi-nizampur-civic-body-seizes-15-kg-of-ghee-mixed-with-animal-fat-101704528996768.html","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.63836464,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal fat"],"actions":["seizure","destruction"],"locations":["Bhiwandi, Thane, Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Bhiwandi Nizampur civic body seizes 15 kg of ghee mixed with animal fat Bhiwandi officials raided a closed slaughterhouse and seized 20 boxes of ghee mixed with animal fat. The ghee was being supplied to hotels and...","search_text":"$1b1"},{"article_id":"oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","slug":"oil-e39fdddbd1ead59b","title":"Over 4 lakh litres seized in drive against substandard edible oil in UP","source":"theprint.in","date":"2024-01-01","url":"https://theprint.in/india/over-4-lakh-litres-seized-in-drive-against-substandard-edible-oil-in-up/2866887/","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.9047990471298696,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","inspection","correction notices"],"locations":["Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"Lucknow, Feb 28 (PTI) The Uttar Pradesh Food Safety and Drug Administration (FSDA) has seized 4,16,494 litres of edible oil of suspect or substandard quality, estimated to be worth approximately Rs 6.43 crore. FSDA has...","search_text":"$1b2"},{"article_id":"oil-9c21da748413e6f9","slug":"oil-9c21da748413e6f9","title":"‘Pressing’ issues: Coconut oil first in line for ‘Made in Kerala’ tag","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2023-12-22","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/kerala/2023/dec/22/pressing-issues-coconut-oil-first-in-line-for-made-in-kerala-tag-2643748.html","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.5198,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["coconut oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["adulterated oil"],"actions":[],"locations":["Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, India"],"primary_state":"Kerala","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: It’s all about setting standards and dealing with ‘pressing’ issues. Coconut oil will be the first product to get the ‘Made in Kerala’ tag, as part of the state government’s Kerala Brand initiative...","search_text":"$1b3"},{"article_id":"550bda80-b5be-488a-89f6-64b9698b4033","slug":"ghee-550bda80-b5be-488a-89f6-64b9698b4033","title":"Adulterated Ghee: Adulterated Ghee Seized in Gujarat: Beware of Duplicate Branded Ghee | Ahmedabad News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2023-12-21","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/ahmedabad/adulterated-ghee-seized-in-gujarat-beware-of-duplicate-branded-ghee/articleshow/106168455.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["soybean oil","vegetable oil","palm oil","ghee flavour","potato","starch"],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Gujarat, India"],"primary_state":"Gujarat","accepted_triplet_count":7,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"Ahmedabad: That golden dollop of clarified butter you canât have your aloo paratha without might just be laden with toxic ingredients, warns the state Food and Drugs Control Administration (FDCA), alerting citizens to...","search_text":"$1b4"},{"article_id":"oil-077084a32a4e8faa","slug":"oil-077084a32a4e8faa","title":"Navi Mumbai: 7 booked for selling adulterated edible oil","source":"mid-day.com","date":"2023-12-07","url":"https://www.mid-day.com/mumbai/mumbai-crime-news/article/navi-mumbai-7-booked-for-selling-adulterated-edible-oil-23323774","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.7117216974740115,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["palm oil","groundnut oil","safflower oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["animal fats","harmful substances"],"actions":["First Information Report"],"locations":["Navi Mumbai, Thane, Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Navi Mumbai: 7 booked for selling adulterated edible oil Seven people linked to an agro firm have been accused of selling adulterated edible oil. Navi Mumbai Police has filed an FIR against them. Representative Image...","search_text":"$1b5"},{"article_id":"oil-028241dff8c29c89","slug":"oil-028241dff8c29c89","title":"'Spurious' food items seized at Ferozepur meritorious school","source":"tribuneindia.com","date":"2023-12-04","url":"https://www.tribuneindia.com/news/punjab/spurious-food-items-seized-at-ferozepur-meritorious-school-568467","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.2628,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["refined oil","flour"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["unknown adulterant"],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Hakumatwala, Ferozepur, Punjab, India"],"primary_state":"Punjab","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Anirudh Gupta Ferozepur, December 3 A day after 74 students of a meritorious school in Sangrur had to be hospitalised after consuming ‘substandard’ food, a team from the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India...","search_text":"$1b6"},{"article_id":"86b559ac-3645-468b-9f43-7d961bd255d7","slug":"ghee-86b559ac-3645-468b-9f43-7d961bd255d7","title":"Artificial ghee making factory busted in Dwarka | Delhi News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2023-11-25","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/delhi/artificial-ghee-making-factory-busted-in-dwarka/articleshow/105485614.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.90575527,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["raid","seizure","arrest"],"locations":["Dwarka, Delhi, India"],"primary_state":"Delhi","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"NEW DELHI: Police have busted a unit selling fake ghee, made in Dichau Kalan of Dwarka, which was sold using counterfeit labels of Amul, Mother Dairy, Milkfood and Naksh Dairy. Two workers at the unit have been...","search_text":"$1b7"},{"article_id":"5710a503-9fbe-46ae-abd5-2663069b70db","slug":"ghee-5710a503-9fbe-46ae-abd5-2663069b70db","title":"Delhi: Fake Ghee Making Factory Busted In Dwarka, Labels Of Brands Such As Patanjali, Mother Dairy, Amul Recovered","source":"india.com","date":"2023-11-24","url":"https://www.india.com/news/delhi/delhi-fake-ghee-making-factory-busted-in-dwarka-labels-of-brands-such-as-patanjali-mother-dairy-amul-recovered-6531374/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit"],"adulterants":["vanaspati oil","burnt engine oil","low-grade palm oil","dangerous chemicals"],"actions":["factory busted","arrest"],"locations":["Dwarka, Delhi, India"],"primary_state":"Delhi","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"New Delhi: The Delhi Police has busted a factory in Dwarka that manufactured spurious ghee and sold it containers with labels of brands such as Patanjali, Mother Dairy and Amul. During the raid, “we found different...","search_text":"$1b8"},{"article_id":"473ed916-1979-4222-b1e8-38d39c51fe03","slug":"ghee-473ed916-1979-4222-b1e8-38d39c51fe03","title":"Fake ghee manufacturing unit busted in Delhi, packaging material of Amul, Mother Dairy, Patanjali recovered","source":"punjabnewsexpress.com","date":"2023-11-24","url":"https://www.punjabnewsexpress.com/news/news/fake-ghee-manufacturing-unit-busted-in-delhi-packaging-material-of-amul-mother-dairy-patanjali-recovered-230157","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit"],"adulterants":["artificial ghee","ghee like substance"],"actions":["raid","case registration"],"locations":["Dichaun Kalan, Dwarka, Delhi, India"],"primary_state":"Delhi","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":8,"excerpt":"Fake ghee manufacturing unit busted in Delhi, packaging material of Amul, Mother Dairy, Patanjali recovered NEW DELHI: Delhi Police has busted a factory making artificial or counterfeit ghee and branding in the name of...","search_text":"$1b9"},{"article_id":"816a43e1-6b33-4a27-a385-9d12dd8e924f","slug":"ghee-816a43e1-6b33-4a27-a385-9d12dd8e924f","title":"11 quintals of spurious ghee seized in Malerkotla - The Tribune","source":"tribuneindia.com","date":"2023-11-11","url":"https://www.tribuneindia.com/news/punjab/11-quintals-of-spurious-ghee-seized-in-malerkotla-561529","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["unspecified"],"actions":["confiscation"],"locations":["Malerkotla, Sangrur, Punjab, India"],"primary_state":"Punjab","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Sangrur: Officials of the Food Safety Department at Malerkotla have confiscated 11 quintals of adulterated desi ghee and started further investigation. “We have seized 11 quintals of adulterated desi ghee from a dairy...","search_text":"$1ba"},{"article_id":"oil-829d382c68663635","slug":"oil-829d382c68663635","title":"Nashik Fda Cracks Down On Adulterated Food Items, Oil | Nashik News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2023-11-09","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/nashik/nashik-fda-cracks-down-on-adulterated-food-items-oil/articleshow/105082876.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.9009942870544224,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["loose oil","shrikhand"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Nashik, Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"Nashik: The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) of the Nashik division has seized adulterated food items and spurious cooking oil from different parts of the district over the last 15-20 days. The total amount of seized...","search_text":"$1bb"},{"article_id":"ff4c3069-118e-4f08-aa39-6394130a8ec4","slug":"ghee-ff4c3069-118e-4f08-aa39-6394130a8ec4","title":"Punjab: 6,500 kg of spurious sweets, milk items seized in 10 days - The Tribune","source":"tribuneindia.com","date":"2023-11-09","url":"https://www.tribuneindia.com/news/punjab/6-500-kg-of-spurious-sweets-milk-items-seized-in-10-days-560816","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"provisional","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.48885288,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["India, Faridkot"],"accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Vishav Bharti Chandigarh, November 8 In the past 10 days, the food safety wing of Punjab’s Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has seized over 6,500 kg of khoya and sweets, which were unfit for human consumption. Around...","search_text":"$1bc"},{"article_id":"85680853-3899-4f21-b262-dbe3e8893779","slug":"ghee-85680853-3899-4f21-b262-dbe3e8893779","title":"3,000 kg adulterated ghee seized in Uttar Pradesh's Firozabad","source":"indiatoday.in","date":"2023-11-09","url":"https://www.indiatoday.in/cities/agra/story/diwali-2023-adulterated-ghee-seized-in-uttar-pradeshs-firozabad-2460654-2023-11-09?utm_source=rss","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["refined vegetable oil","chemicals"],"actions":["seizure","case registered"],"locations":["Firozabad, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"3,000 kg adulterated ghee seized in Uttar Pradesh's Firozabad According to the district administration, refined vegetable oil and other chemicals were being used in the factory to make the adulterated ghee. Ahead of the...","search_text":"$1bd"},{"article_id":"oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","slug":"oil-f8ae628f96d390f8","title":"Mumbai News: Adulterated Sweets, Edible Oil Worth ₹1.64 Lakh Seized By FDA","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2023-11-06","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/mumbai/mumbai-news-adulterated-sweets-edible-oil-worth-164-lakh-seized-by-fda","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8980067916239759,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":2,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["sunflower oil","palmolein oil","used cooking oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","mislabeling"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["raid","seizure"],"locations":["Mumbai, Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Mumbai: Ahead of Diwali, the Food And Drug Administration (FDA) has raided three establishments in the western suburbs and seized adulterated sweets and edible oil worth ₹1,64,655. A senior official, who was part of the...","search_text":"$1be"},{"article_id":"aa57f0d8-8cb4-4c4c-8ef4-4c4acdef25e4","slug":"ghee-aa57f0d8-8cb4-4c4c-8ef4-4c4acdef25e4","title":"2,633kg Of Spurious Ghee Confiscated | Ahmedabad News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2023-10-22","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/ahmedabad/2633kg-of-spurious-ghee-confiscated/articleshow/104618362.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":2,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","unclear"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India","Umargam, Valsad, Gujarat, India"],"primary_state":"Gujarat","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"Ahmedabad: Gujarat State Food and Drug Control Administration (FDCA) seized 2,633kg adulterated ghee worth Rs 10.34 lakh. FDCA commissioner H G Koshia said that the state government is vigilant to ensure that the...","search_text":"$1bf"},{"article_id":"faaca14c-514a-4f25-897a-cd9bbc31d5d0","slug":"ghee-faaca14c-514a-4f25-897a-cd9bbc31d5d0","title":"1,100 Litres Of Cheap Ghee Seized In City | Jaipur News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2023-10-18","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/jaipur/1100-litres-of-cheap-ghee-seized-in-city/articleshow/104512484.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Jaipur, Rajasthan, India"],"primary_state":"Rajasthan","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"Jaipur: Food safety officers are keeping a close eye on traders selling ghee at a price ranging between Rs 350 and Rs 400 per litre. Suspecting it of sub-standard quality, food safety officers conducted inspections at...","search_text":"1,100 Litres Of Cheap Ghee Seized In City | Jaipur News - Times of India indiatimes.com Jaipur: Food safety officers are keeping a close eye on traders selling ghee at a price ranging between Rs 350 and Rs 400 per litre. Suspecting it of sub-standard quality, food safety officers conducted inspections at Durga Trading Company in Bani Park and seized 1,130 litres of Amrit brand and Dairy Shubham brand ghee on the spot. TNN ghee substandard seizure suspected Jaipur, Rajasthan, India seizure of 1,130 litres of ghee fflo:targets ghee seized 1,130 litres of Amrit brand and Dairy Shubham brand ghee Seizure of sub-standard ghee fflo:foundAtStep Retail traders selling ghee at a price ranging between Rs 350 and Rs 400 seizure of ghee fflo:targets ghee seized 1,130 litres of Amrit brand and Dairy Shubham brand ghee"},{"article_id":"5118358f-2777-4bfd-a761-adb4bc1da763","slug":"ghee-5118358f-2777-4bfd-a761-adb4bc1da763","title":"Ludhiana: Out of 134 samples 25 items fail food safety test in three months","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2023-10-18","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/cities/chandigarh-news/ludhiana-out-of-134-samples-25-items-fail-food-safety-test-in-three-months-101697652910066.html","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"provisional","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.53293169,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["sample_collection"],"locations":["India, Ludhiana"],"accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":12,"excerpt":"Ludhiana: Out of 134 samples 25 items fail food safety test in three months The items which were found tainted by misbranding or adulteration include staples like paneer, ghee, salt, Jaggery, and dal, according to...","search_text":"$1c0"},{"article_id":"a06cd968-9dc5-42c5-a6e8-3d3c36dfc8c2","slug":"ghee-a06cd968-9dc5-42c5-a6e8-3d3c36dfc8c2","title":"â_x0080__x0098_substandard Ghee Supplied To Make Prasad In Ambajiâ_x0080__x0099_ | Vadodara News - The Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2023-10-04","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/vadodara/substandard-ghee-supplied-to-make-prasad-in-ambaji/articleshow/104146821.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.67858363,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","mislabeling"],"adulterants":["loose ghee"],"actions":["FIR registered","contract cancellation","seizure"],"locations":["Ambaji, Banaskantha, Gujarat, India"],"primary_state":"Gujarat","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":17,"excerpt":"Vadodara/Gandhinagar: A firm which was entrusted with making âmohanthal prasadâ (a sweet made from chickpea flour, sugar and ghee) for devotees of the famous Ambaji temple during the âBhadarvi Poonamâ fair, supplied...","search_text":"$1c1"},{"article_id":"8aaa4093-987c-4a1d-8fbd-8e1d1e495fe3","slug":"ghee-8aaa4093-987c-4a1d-8fbd-8e1d1e495fe3","title":"Chatuhshringi police, FDA seize 650 kg of adulterated ghee, oil","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2023-10-04","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/cities/pune-news/chatuhshringi-police-fda-seize-650-kg-of-adulterated-ghee-oil-101696443911789.html","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["spurious ghee"],"actions":["seizure","arrest"],"locations":["Pune, Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"Chatuhshringi police, FDA seize 650 kg of adulterated ghee, oil The police have arrested Sangram Singh Tej Singh Rajput (38), a resident of Budhwar Peth, and booked him under various sections for endangering the public...","search_text":"$1c2"},{"article_id":"2ad1f047-985c-4c59-aa13-749fa75bcba9","slug":"ghee-2ad1f047-985c-4c59-aa13-749fa75bcba9","title":"Hyderabad: Man held for selling adulterated ghee in Secunderabad","source":"siasat.com","date":"2023-08-20","url":"https://www.siasat.com/hyderabad-man-held-for-selling-adulterated-ghee-in-secunderabad-2672406/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["Dalda cooking oil","groundnut oil"],"actions":["arrest","seizure"],"locations":["Secunderabad, Hyderabad, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"Hyderabad: Hyderabad Police Commissioner’s Task Force on Sunday, August 20, arrested a man for allegedly selling adulterated ghee. Nearly 45 kg of adulterated ghee was recovered from his possession. Acting on a tip-off,...","search_text":"$1c3"},{"article_id":"ff092982-3b6e-4f4c-8194-6b8201ee1246","slug":"ghee-ff092982-3b6e-4f4c-8194-6b8201ee1246","title":"Five get life term in 14-year-old ghee adulteration case in UP | India News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2023-08-13","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/five-get-life-term-in-14-year-old-ghee-adulteration-case-in-up/articleshow/102686606.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.7701787,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["arrest"],"locations":["India, Bareilly, UP"],"accepted_triplet_count":5,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"BAREILLY: In a \"landmark judgment\", the court of an additional district judge awarded life imprisonment to five men in a 14-year-old food adulteration case in Bareilly. Judge Arvind Kumar Yadav also imposed a fine of Rs...","search_text":"$1c4"},{"article_id":"944709d1-19c5-461e-a509-d35f5314cc8e","slug":"ghee-944709d1-19c5-461e-a509-d35f5314cc8e","title":"Spurious Ghee Racket Busted In City, 1 Arrested | Jaipur News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2023-08-13","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/jaipur/spurious-ghee-racket-busted-in-city-1-arrested/articleshow/102689895.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.92094039,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Jaipur, Rajasthan, India, Jaipur, Rajasthan"],"primary_state":"Rajasthan","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":11,"excerpt":"Jaipur: Ahead of the festive season, the city police on Sunday organised a crackdown on spurious ghee racket in two separate locations and arrested one person. Police teams confiscated over a thousand packets, tins and...","search_text":"$1c5"},{"article_id":"6a44ea24-a3bf-4ad8-96b1-5ae56cefb84c","slug":"ghee-6a44ea24-a3bf-4ad8-96b1-5ae56cefb84c","title":"Five get life term for adulterating ghee in 2009 | Bareilly News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2023-08-13","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/bareilly/five-get-life-term-for-adulterating-ghee-in-2009/articleshow/102690821.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["arrest"],"locations":["India, Bareilly"],"accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"BAREILLY: In a \"landmark judgement\", the court of an additional district judge awarded life imprisonment to five men in a 14-year-old food adulteration case in Bareilly. Judge Arvind Kumar Yadav also imposed a fine of...","search_text":"$1c6"},{"article_id":"oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","slug":"oil-bfcfd938ead3b8a8","title":"Adani Wilmar files FIR against sale of counterfeit ‘Fortune’ products by Jumbotail","source":"financialexpress.com","date":"2023-07-23","url":"https://www.financialexpress.com/industry/adani-wilmar-files-fir-against-sale-of-counterfeit-fortune-products-by-jumbotail/3183110/","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.4479,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["mustard oil","soybean oil"],"issue_types":["counterfeit"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["raid","FIR filed"],"locations":["Gautam Budhnagar, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"FMCG major Adani Wilmar has filed a police complaint against B2B platform Jumbotail Pvt. Ltd for allegedly distributing counterfeit ‘Fortune’ products. Acting upon this complaint, the law enforcement authorities...","search_text":"$1c7"},{"article_id":"oil-30270b1b4280233d","slug":"oil-30270b1b4280233d","title":"Adani Wilmar Files Police Complaint Against Sale Of Counterfeit Fortune Brand Products","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2023-07-23","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/business/adani-wilmar-files-police-complaint-against-sale-of-counterfeit-fortune-brand-products","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.587,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["Fortune Kacchi Ghani Mustard Oil","Fortune Refined Soybean Oil","Fortune Sarso Oil"],"issue_types":["counterfeit"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["FIR lodged","raid"],"locations":["Badalpur, Gautam Budhnagar District, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Edible oil major Adani Wilmar Ltd on Saturday said it has lodged a police complaint against a B2B platform for allegedly distributing counterfeit products in the name of its 'Fortune' brand. As part of a routine market...","search_text":"$1c8"},{"article_id":"oil-7269f661e72c703f","slug":"oil-7269f661e72c703f","title":"Adani Wilmar files police complaint against sale of counterfeit Fortune brand products","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2023-07-22","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/business/india-business/adani-wilmar-files-police-complaint-against-sale-of-counterfeit-fortune-brand-products/articleshow/102043619.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.575,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["Fortune Kacchi Ghani Mustard Oil","Fortune Refined Soybean Oil","Fortune Sarso Oil"],"issue_types":["counterfeit"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["FIR lodged","raid"],"locations":["Gautam Budhnagar, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"NEW DELHI: Edible oil major Adani Wilmar Ltd on Saturday said it has lodged a police complaint against a B2B platform for allegedly distributing counterfeit products in the name of its ' Fortune' brand. As part of a...","search_text":"$1c9"},{"article_id":"52bd3a8a-1c92-484d-8be6-5f7e4a7274e1","slug":"ghee-52bd3a8a-1c92-484d-8be6-5f7e4a7274e1","title":"Food Dept raids units making spurious ghee - The Tribune","source":"tribuneindia.com","date":"2023-06-02","url":"https://www.tribuneindia.com/news/haryana/food-dept-raids-units-making-spurious-ghee-513513","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.64687917,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["raid"],"locations":["Hisar, Haryana, India"],"primary_state":"Haryana","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Hisar, June 1 Advertisement A special team of the Hisar Range police and the Food Safety Department conducted raids on spurious desi ghee making units in Hisar, Hansi and Jind districts today and seized material being...","search_text":"Food Dept raids units making spurious ghee - The Tribune tribuneindia.com Hisar, June 1\nAdvertisement\nA special team of the Hisar Range police and the Food Safety Department conducted raids on spurious desi ghee making units in Hisar, Hansi and Jind districts today and seized material being used in manufacturing the spurious ghee.\nAdvertisement ghee adulteration counterfeit raid alleged Hisar, Haryana, India raids on spurious desi ghee making units fflo:issuedBy Food Safety Department Food Safety Department conducted raids on spurious desi ghee making units raids on spurious desi ghee making units fflo:issuedBy Hisar Range police Hisar Range police ... conducted raids on spurious desi ghee making units"},{"article_id":"451d9824-7933-403d-beaa-1ac6398509c9","slug":"ghee-451d9824-7933-403d-beaa-1ac6398509c9","title":"Ujjain: Adulterated ghee seized from Unhel firm","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2023-05-17","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/ujjain/ujjain-adulterated-ghee-seized-from-unhel-firm","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.62800647,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","proposal to suspend food safety officer"],"locations":["Unhel, Ujjain, Madhya Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Madhya Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"Ujjain (Madhya Pradesh): Food Safety Administration along with Nagda SDM and Unhel police station on Tuesday reached the vacant house in front of a shop located in Bada Bazaar in Unhel for investigation. A total of...","search_text":"$1ca"},{"article_id":"79f059b8-00b2-4345-ad46-440c7bc371df","slug":"ghee-79f059b8-00b2-4345-ad46-440c7bc371df","title":"Madhya Pradesh: Adulterated khoya, ghee seized from Unhel Dairy Farm","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2023-05-11","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/indore/madhya-pradesh-adulterated-khoya-ghee-seized-from-unhel-dairy-farm","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.4731853,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["khoya","vanaspati ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["artificial flavors","vanaspati ghee"],"actions":["seizure","legal action"],"locations":["Unhel, Ujjain, Madhya Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Madhya Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Unhel (Madhya Pradesh): Food Safety officials raided a dairy farm at Unhel town of Ujjain on Tuesday night. The team seized adulterated khoya from the dairy. Acting on a tip-off on spurious milk-based products, food...","search_text":"$1cb"},{"article_id":"ec990258-7999-4c93-81af-59b6ab2c65df","slug":"ghee-ec990258-7999-4c93-81af-59b6ab2c65df","title":"Spurious ghee packets seized in Ambala City - The Tribune","source":"tribuneindia.com","date":"2023-03-10","url":"https://www.tribuneindia.com/news/chandigarh/spurious-ghee-packets-seized-in-ambala-city-486565","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"provisional","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.79308709,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["recall_triggered"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["mislabeling"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["India, Ambala City"],"accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":8,"excerpt":"Ambala, March 9 A team of the CM’s flying squad has recovered 630 packets of spurious ghee of different brands from a vehicle in Ambala City. Sources said acting on a tip-off, a team of the CM’s flying squad stopped a...","search_text":"$1cc"},{"article_id":"oil-c1a2f95596a3b00d","slug":"oil-c1a2f95596a3b00d","title":"Food Dept Seizes 831l Mustard Oil | Kanpur News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2023-03-06","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/kanpur/food-dept-seizes-831l-mustard-oil/articleshow/98439612.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8041298144466288,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["mustard oil","soyabean oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["Seizure of 799 litre mustard oil","Seizure of 34 litre refined soyabean oil"],"locations":["Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Kanpur: Food security and drug administration department on Sunday seized around 831 litre of mustard oil worth Rs 1,14,764 and collected 19 samples of food items and sent them to lab for testing. The mustard oil was...","search_text":"$1cd"},{"article_id":"0aa842b8-1ac9-4243-a8b6-5d98d32d6089","slug":"ghee-0aa842b8-1ac9-4243-a8b6-5d98d32d6089","title":"Madhya Pradesh: Man held for selling adulterated ghee","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2023-01-14","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/bhopal/madhya-pradesh-man-held-for-selling-adulterated-ghee","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.80708859,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["scent"],"actions":["arrest","confiscation","case_registered"],"locations":["Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Madhya Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Jabalpur (Madhya Pradesh): A man selling adulterated ghee was arrested and over 22 kg of ghee, 25 litres of soy bean oil, a huge quantity of scent and an electronic balance were confiscated from his house, the police...","search_text":"$1ce"},{"article_id":"61a00782-20f7-4170-b4e2-d9d9157b3a3c","slug":"ghee-61a00782-20f7-4170-b4e2-d9d9157b3a3c","title":"Adulterated milk products seized by food safety team","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2023-01-11","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/cities/chandigarh-news/adulterated-milk-products-seized-by-food-safety-team-101673460602370.html","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.69578688,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["ghee"],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["India"],"accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"Adulterated milk products seized by food safety team During the inspection at the Baba Meera Ji Enterprises, the team discovered a large number of adulterated food products, including approximately 8 quintals of...","search_text":"$1cf"},{"article_id":"oil-4b88eb2520f8cc22","slug":"oil-4b88eb2520f8cc22","title":"Bhopal: Lose oil sale; FDA suspends mills’ licence","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2022-12-17","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/bhopal/bhopal-lose-oil-sale-fda-suspends-mills-licence","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.6509,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["soybean oil","palmolein oil"],"issue_types":["mislabeling","substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["suspension of licence"],"locations":["Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Madhya Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Bhopal (Madhya Pradesh): Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) Department, which had conducted a raid at Shankar Oil Mills located in Azad Market on Friday, has suspended the latter’s licence. The order to suspend licence...","search_text":"$1d0"},{"article_id":"f1f602c9-64cd-4bfc-855c-fb8060a9c483","slug":"ghee-f1f602c9-64cd-4bfc-855c-fb8060a9c483","title":"BJP MP attacks Yoga Guru Baba Ramdev over Patanjali's 'fake ghee'","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2022-12-05","url":"https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/politics-and-nation/bjp-mp-attacks-yoga-guru-baba-ramdev-over-patanjalis-fake-ghee/videoshow/95993428.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.9,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.52315927,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["adulterated"],"actions":[],"locations":["India"],"accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"More ScienceDefenceInternationalUS NewsGlobal TrendsCanada NewsUK NewsAustraliaNew ZealandSaudi ArabiaUAESingaporeHong KongBusinessWorld NewsET ExplainsCompanyCorporate TrendsIndustryTrendingDecodedMorning Brief...","search_text":"BJP MP attacks Yoga Guru Baba Ramdev over Patanjali's 'fake ghee' indiatimes.com More\nScienceDefenceInternationalUS NewsGlobal TrendsCanada NewsUK NewsAustraliaNew ZealandSaudi ArabiaUAESingaporeHong KongBusinessWorld NewsET ExplainsCompanyCorporate TrendsIndustryTrendingDecodedMorning Brief PodcastET EvokeBengaluru NewsPune NewsMumbai NewsVideosLatest NewsMost ReadMost SharedMost Commented\nBJP MP attacks Yoga Guru Baba Ramdev over Patanjali's 'fake ghee'\nBJP MP from Kaiserganj, Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh has mounted a blistering attack on Yoga Guru Baba Ramdev, accusing him of selling 'fake ghee' under the brand name Patanjali.\nRead more on ghee adulteration adulterated suspected India Accusation of fake ghee by Patanjali prov:wasAttributedTo Patanjali accusing him of selling 'fake ghee' under the brand name Patanjali Accusation of fake ghee by Patanjali prov:wasAttributedTo Baba Ramdev accusing him of selling 'fake ghee' under the brand name Patanjali"},{"article_id":"oil-e1aa62675070cacd","slug":"oil-e1aa62675070cacd","title":"Argemone poisoning claims life in Jawalamukhi, alert sounded in HP’s Kangra","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2022-11-19","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/cities/chandigarh-news/argemone-poisoning-claims-life-in-jawalamukhi-alert-sounded-in-hp-s-kangra-101668798072979.html","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.4488,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["mustard oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","contamination"],"adulterants":["Argemone mexicana"],"actions":["public alert"],"locations":["Jawalamukhi, Kangra, Himachal Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Himachal Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":13,"excerpt":"Argemone poisoning claims life in Jawalamukhi, alert sounded in HP’s Kangra The victims had bought the mustard from a local market in Khudian. It is learnt that the wholesaler is based at Paragpur area and it is...","search_text":"$1d1"},{"article_id":"oil-b96369f55af40397","slug":"oil-b96369f55af40397","title":"Govt Cracks Down On Sale Of Adulterated Coconut Oil | Thiruvananthapuram News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2022-11-17","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/thiruvananthapuram/govt-cracks-down-on-sale-of-adulterated-coconut-oil/articleshow/95568940.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.9165677579315566,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["coconut oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":["sulphur"],"actions":["Operation Oil","notices","fines"],"locations":["Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, India"],"primary_state":"Kerala","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":1,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Thiruvananthapuram: The food safety department has launched a special drive across the state as part of its crackdown on adulterated coconut oil. Named Operation Oil, searches have been conducted in as many as 100...","search_text":"$1d2"},{"article_id":"f5876a8c-263e-4134-a5b2-ba2453ed9080","slug":"ghee-f5876a8c-263e-4134-a5b2-ba2453ed9080","title":"Thane: Adulteration detected in 27% cooking oil from 4 firms by FDA","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2022-11-17","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/business/thane-adulteration-detected-in-27-cooking-oil-from-4-firms-by-fda","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.5217194,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["adulteration detected"],"locations":["India, Thane district"],"accepted_triplet_count":7,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"At least 27 per cent of the 56 samples of cooking oil and other food items collected from four companies in Maharashtra's Thane district have been found adulterated or with false claims, the Food and Drug Administration...","search_text":"$1d3"},{"article_id":"f0a80593-3eca-497d-afa0-90d16a414e1d","slug":"ghee-f0a80593-3eca-497d-afa0-90d16a414e1d","title":"Thane: 27 per cent samples of edible oil, other food items from four firms found adulterated, says FDA","source":"mid-day.com","date":"2022-11-17","url":"https://www.mid-day.com/mumbai/mumbai-news/article/thane-27-per-cent-samples-of-edible-oil-other-food-items-from-four-firms-found-adulterated-says-fda-23255966","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.52152963,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["recall_triggered"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["adulteration"],"locations":["India, Thane district"],"accepted_triplet_count":10,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":0,"excerpt":"Thane: 27 per cent samples of edible oil, other food items from four firms found adulterated, says FDA The samples tested revealed that palmolein oil was mixed in products sold as sunflower and soyabean oils, rice bran...","search_text":"$1d4"},{"article_id":"e1083f09-5ed1-4bdf-8ac5-3c65482b8e5f","slug":"ghee-e1083f09-5ed1-4bdf-8ac5-3c65482b8e5f","title":"27 per cent samples of edible oil, other food items from 4 firms in Thane found adulterated: FDA","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2022-11-17","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/nation/2022/nov/17/27-per-cent-samples-of-edible-oil-other-food-items-from-4-firms-in-thane-found-adulterated-fda-2519197.html","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.5279161,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["FDA inspection"],"locations":["Thane district, Maharashtra, India, Thane district, Maharashtra"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":5,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"THANE: At least 27 per cent of the 56 samples of cooking oil and other food items collected from four companies in Maharashtra's Thane district have been found adulterated or with false claims, the Food and Drug...","search_text":"$1d5"},{"article_id":"oil-3be954e8def80c8d","slug":"oil-3be954e8def80c8d","title":"Operation Oil: manufacturer to be allowed to launch only one brand of oil ","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2022-11-16","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/kerala/operation-oil-manufacturer-to-be-allowed-to-launch-only-one-brand-of-oil/article66144992.ece","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.9416271420983549,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["coconut oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["Operation Oil"],"locations":["Kerala, India"],"primary_state":"Kerala","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Tightening the noose around the adulterated coconut oil manufacturers, the State government has decided to allow a manufacturer to launch only one brand of coconut oil. The norm would be strictly enforced in the State...","search_text":"$1d6"},{"article_id":"ed2c35d4-102a-4b73-8382-2ac35610faed","slug":"ghee-ed2c35d4-102a-4b73-8382-2ac35610faed","title":"Over 1,000 kg duplicate ghee seized in Surat","source":"theshillongtimes.com","date":"2022-11-09","url":"https://theshillongtimes.com/2022/11/09/over-1000-kg-duplicate-ghee-seized-in-surat/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.90590482,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution","mislabeling"],"adulterants":["palm oil","colour","essence"],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Surat, Gujarat, India"],"primary_state":"Gujarat","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":11,"excerpt":"SURAT, Nov 9: Over 1,000 kg duplicate ghee (clarified butter) was seized from Kim taluka in Surat, police said on Wednesday. Acting on a tip-off, Surat police seized 1,072 kg duplicate ghee on Tuesday evening. As per...","search_text":"$1d7"},{"article_id":"dab486f0-dfe1-46a8-b0d8-32e2a200b8e8","slug":"ghee-dab486f0-dfe1-46a8-b0d8-32e2a200b8e8","title":"Over 1,000 kg adulterated ghee seized in Surat","source":"ibtimes.co.in","date":"2022-11-09","url":"https://www.ibtimes.co.in/over-1000-kg-adulterated-ghee-seized-surat-853935","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.92952776,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["palm oil","colour","essence"],"actions":["seizure","pending criminal complaint"],"locations":["Surat, Gujarat, India"],"primary_state":"Gujarat","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"Over 1,000 kg duplicate ghee (clarified butter) was seized from Kim taluka in Surat, police said on Wednesday. Acting on a tip-off, Surat police seized 1,072 kg duplicate ghee on Tuesday evening. As per information, one...","search_text":"$1d8"},{"article_id":"9c81b00b-87e1-4cce-bfc8-9583b3b8a234","slug":"ghee-9c81b00b-87e1-4cce-bfc8-9583b3b8a234","title":"Racket Selling Fake Ghee Online Busted | Surat News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2022-11-09","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/surat/racket-selling-fake-ghee-online-busted/articleshow/95390237.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.93313974,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["palm oil","vegetable fat"],"actions":["raid","arrest"],"locations":["Surat, Gujarat, India"],"primary_state":"Gujarat","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"SURAT: Police raided a duplicate ghee-making unit at Kudsad village of Surat district on Tuesday and recovered materials worth Rs 14 lakh. Police also arrested racketeer Mehul Patel for allegedly running the clandestine...","search_text":"$1d9"},{"article_id":"oil-7ced813eb9eb1314","slug":"oil-7ced813eb9eb1314","title":"Hyderabad: 7 LPG cylinders seized in cordon and search; 10 held","source":"siasat.com","date":"2022-11-06","url":"https://www.siasat.com/hyderabad-7-lpg-cylinders-seized-in-cordon-and-search-10-held-2450708/","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.2688,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal carcasses"],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Hyderabad, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Hyderabad: The Chaderghat police on Sunday detained 10 persons and 1 history-sheeter, for the illegal sale of gas cylinders, and seized 45 bikes as owners failed to produce supporting documents. The police searched...","search_text":"$1da"},{"article_id":"oil-7ed3f9582cae741d","slug":"oil-7ed3f9582cae741d","title":"Mustard, Palm Olein Oil Worth â¹7.7l Seized | Kanpur News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2022-10-21","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/kanpur/mustard-palm-olein-oil-worth-7-7l-seized/articleshow/95000423.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8433136916258085,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["mustard oil","palm olein oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Kanpur: Teams of FSA on Thursday seized over 604 liters of mustard and palm olein oil worth Rs 7,67,800 from various vendors in city. Besides, the department also collected as many as 23 samples for lab testing....","search_text":"$1db"},{"article_id":"9379cea2-647c-459b-af54-770e31e9bbe1","slug":"ghee-9379cea2-647c-459b-af54-770e31e9bbe1","title":"Fake Milk Food Items Seized In Dausa | Jaipur News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2022-10-20","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/jaipur/fake-milk-food-items-seized-in-dausa/articleshow/94976564.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.51992774,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit"],"adulterants":["spurious milk products"],"actions":["raid","seizure"],"locations":["Dausa, Rajasthan, India"],"primary_state":"Rajasthan","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Jaipur: The CID wing of Rajasthan police busted a major spurious milk food product factory in Dausa ahead of Diwali. The CID teams raided the factory located in Dausa district on Tuesday and seized 5,000 kg of desi ghee...","search_text":"$1dc"},{"article_id":"fec4e8d2-6a2f-4046-b9d4-85a831f76655","slug":"ghee-fec4e8d2-6a2f-4046-b9d4-85a831f76655","title":"Mumbai: Ahead of Diwali, FDA seizes 400 kg adulterated ghee worth Rs 3 lakh in Masjid Bandar","source":"mid-day.com","date":"2022-10-19","url":"https://www.mid-day.com/mumbai/mumbai-news/article/mumbai-ahead-of-diwali-festival-fda-seizes-400-kg-adulterated-ghee-worth-rs-3-lakh-in-masjid-bandar-23251244","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.93226156,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Mumbai, Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"Mumbai: Ahead of Diwali, FDA seizes 400 kg adulterated ghee worth Rs 3 lakh in Masjid Bandar According to the FDA officials, ahead of the Diwali festival, the Mumbai region of the FDA has been vigilant about the food...","search_text":"$1dd"},{"article_id":"92b301e8-97fb-47a7-94a6-b858beb0a1fb","slug":"ghee-92b301e8-97fb-47a7-94a6-b858beb0a1fb","title":"FDA seizes 400 kg adulterated ghee worth Rs 3 lakh in Mumbai","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2022-10-19","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/mumbai/mumbai-fda-seizes-400-kg-fake-ghee-worth-rs-3-lakh-samples-sent-for-laboratory-test","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"provisional","validation_confidence":null,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["India, Masjid Bandar, Mumbai"],"accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"Mumbai: The Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) of Maharashtra seized adulterated ghee that was being sold at a godown in Masjid Bandar, on Tuesday. The seized food products have been estimated to be worth around Rs 3...","search_text":"$1de"},{"article_id":"0f7493be-b335-4851-9029-9e87ba0da155","slug":"ghee-0f7493be-b335-4851-9029-9e87ba0da155","title":"Factories Making Fake Ghee Of Well-known Brands Busted In City | Jaipur News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2022-10-19","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/jaipur/factories-making-fake-ghee-of-well-known-brands-busted-in-city/articleshow/94954456.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":null,"event_count":2,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","report_filed"],"locations":["India, Harmada","India, Ajmer Road"],"accepted_triplet_count":7,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"JAIPUR: At least two factories manufacturing spurious ghee of well-known brands such as Saras and Krishna have been unearthed here in the past 10 days. The health department has seized spurious ghee of branded products...","search_text":"$1df"},{"article_id":"oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","slug":"oil-d02d8c31bf513f40","title":"Uttarakhand: A year on, mustard oil manufacturer, supplier penalised for adulteration | Dehradun News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2022-10-17","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/dehradun/uttarakhand-a-year-on-mustard-oil-manufacturer-supplier-penalised-for-adulteration/articleshow/94903787.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.6180697772580839,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["lab_confirmed"],"food_items":["mustard oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["unspecified"],"actions":["penalty"],"locations":["Pauri, Uttarakhand, India"],"primary_state":"Uttarakhand","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"In a matter of violation of food safety standards, a local court in Pauri penalised a supplier and a manufacturer of mustard oil with Rs 3 lakh, holding them guilty of adulteration. The sample was collected a few days...","search_text":"$1e0"},{"article_id":"oil-94951aba738c80b3","slug":"oil-94951aba738c80b3","title":"16,600 Kg Mustard Oil Seized In Vki | Jaipur News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2022-10-14","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/jaipur/16600-kg-mustard-oil-seized-in-vki/articleshow/94848908.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8785975550730426,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["mustard oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Jaipur, Rajasthan, India"],"primary_state":"Rajasthan","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":0,"excerpt":"Jaipur: Intensifying measures to prevent the sale of adulterated food products ahead of Diwali, health department teams on Thursday seized 166 quintals of mustard oil in Vishwakarma Industrial (VKI) area on suspicion...","search_text":"16,600 Kg Mustard Oil Seized In Vki | Jaipur News - Times of India indiatimes.com Jaipur: Intensifying measures to prevent the sale of adulterated food products ahead of Diwali, health department teams on Thursday seized 166 quintals of mustard oil in Vishwakarma Industrial (VKI) area on suspicion that they were adulterated.\nThe action was taken under the âShudh Ke Liye Yudhâ campaign with the help of the health department, district administration and crime branch.\nMstard oil samples were taken and around 3,600 kg of mustard oil was seized from Goyal Edible on Road Number 14 in VKI area. Samples were collected and 13,000 kgs of mustard oil was also seized from Goyal Oil and Dal Mill. Coriander powder was also seized from Surya Enterprises in VKI area, said officials. TNN mustard oil adulteration seizure suspected Jaipur, Rajasthan, India"},{"article_id":"8151434e-f600-47a9-93df-16b483e88961","slug":"ghee-8151434e-f600-47a9-93df-16b483e88961","title":"Adulterated sweets, wrongly labelled items caught by FDA during festive season","source":"hindustantimes.com","date":"2022-10-14","url":"https://www.hindustantimes.com/cities/mumbai-news/adulterated-sweets-wrongly-labelled-items-caught-by-fda-during-festive-season-101665685867876.html","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.31169843,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee","vegetable oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["vegetable oil"],"actions":["destruction","FIR lodged"],"locations":["Mumbai, Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Adulterated sweets, wrongly labelled items caught by FDA during festive season To intercept the adulterated food even before they reach the local markets, FDA officials kept a vigil at railway stations and bus stops...","search_text":"$1e1"},{"article_id":"oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","slug":"oil-3c8df3ffa6943fef","title":"2500 litres of suspected adulterated cooking oil seized","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2022-10-12","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Hyderabad/2500-litres-of-suspected-adulterated-cooking-oil-seized/article66001879.ece","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8455905632918441,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["cooking oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","mislabeling"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","raid"],"locations":["Vennampalli, Karimnagar, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"A joint team of the Special Branch police and the Food Safety Department personnel on Wednesday seized 2,500 litres of suspected adulterated cooking oil during a raid on an oil mill at Vennampalli village in Saidapur...","search_text":"$1e2"},{"article_id":"oil-63f43befc46e25fa","slug":"oil-63f43befc46e25fa","title":"FDA adopts zero-tolerance policy for edible oil sold loose and in reused tins | Nagpur News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2022-10-04","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/nagpur/fda-adopts-zero-tolerance-policy-for-edible-oil-sold-loose-and-in-reused-tins/articleshow/94628169.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8549294380140151,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure"],"locations":["Nagpur, Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"Nagpur: The Food and drugs administration (FDA) has stepped up its crackdown on edible oils sold loose and also in reused tins. In 2022 till date, FDA has seized 2,075 kgs of edible oils worth more than Rs 2.99 lakhs....","search_text":"$1e3"},{"article_id":"oil-aa814b41a4920904","slug":"oil-aa814b41a4920904","title":"Using counterfeit packaging lands Ropar trader in police net","source":"tribuneindia.com","date":"2022-09-16","url":"https://www.tribuneindia.com/news/punjab/using-counterfeit-packaging-lands-trader-in-police-net-432143","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.3157,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["mustard oil"],"issue_types":["substitution","mislabeling","counterfeit"],"adulterants":["cheaper brands"],"actions":["arrest","seizure"],"locations":["Ropar, Punjab, India"],"primary_state":"Punjab","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Ropar, September 15 The police have arrested a person and seized counterfeit packaging of Tata salt, Patanjali mustard oil and Harpic toilet cleaner from his possession. The accused has been identified as Gian Singh, a...","search_text":"$1e4"},{"article_id":"2fede3c0-46a7-46e8-a776-5a6fd6d3f08e","slug":"ghee-2fede3c0-46a7-46e8-a776-5a6fd6d3f08e","title":"Spurious Ghee Factory Busted, Four Arrested | Kanpur News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2022-09-13","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/kanpur/spurious-ghee-factory-busted-four-arrested/articleshow/94165213.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.91222522,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["special type of chemical"],"actions":["arrest","raid","seizure"],"locations":["Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"KANPUR: The city police with the arrest of four persons busted a factory manufacturing spurious ghee operational in Ratanpur here on Monday. Spurious ghee, equipment, branded company cans and other items were recovered....","search_text":"$1e5"},{"article_id":"oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","slug":"oil-4fbd8c2a2930c559","title":"Chennai: Shop with 4.3 tonnes of blended cooking oil in sump sealed","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2022-08-24","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/chennai/chennai-shop-with-4-3-tonnes-of-blended-cooking-oil-in-sump-sealed/articleshow/93741067.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.7123,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["blended cooking oil"],"issue_types":["contamination","substandard","unsafe_food"],"adulterants":["dust","sand"],"actions":["sealed","show-cause notice"],"locations":["Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India"],"primary_state":"Tamil Nadu","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"CHENNAI: Food safety officials in Chennai on Tuesday sealed a small oil shop in Pillayar Koil Street in West Mambalam for illegally stocking more than 4300 kg of blended cooking oil - palm oil and sunflower - and...","search_text":"$1e6"},{"article_id":"oil-fc5474312cf8529f","slug":"oil-fc5474312cf8529f","title":"With Onam around, adulterated coconut oil floods Kerala market","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2022-08-23","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/cities/thiruvananthapuram/2022/aug/23/with-onam-around-adulterated-coconut-oil-floods-kerala-market-2490320.html","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8246640477375261,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["coconut oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":["unknown"],"actions":["ban on 166 coconut oil brands","special drives"],"locations":["Kerala, India"],"primary_state":"Kerala","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: With Onam around the corner, the flow of adulterated milk and coconut oil to Kerala has increased raising serious concern about the quality of the products sold in the market. Recently, Kerafed has...","search_text":"$1e7"},{"article_id":"oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","slug":"oil-0db512df7c0cc7df","title":"Over 4,000 litre of adulterated oil seized from Chennai store","source":"indianexpress.com","date":"2022-08-23","url":"https://indianexpress.com/article/cities/chennai/over-4-litre-of-adulterated-oil-seized-from-chennai-store-8107733/","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8571322894083552,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","contamination"],"adulterants":["mud","dust"],"actions":["seizure","sealing","notice issued"],"locations":["Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India"],"primary_state":"Tamil Nadu","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Over 4,000 litre of adulterated oil seized from Chennai store The officials noted that they have sent the samples of the oil to the laboratory. Further action will be taken depending on the result, the officials said....","search_text":"$1e8"},{"article_id":"oil-f1693a0670f7b784","slug":"oil-f1693a0670f7b784","title":"Loose Cooking Oil Seized, Fir Lodged Against Proprietor | Indore News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2022-08-18","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/indore/loose-cooking-oil-seized-fir-lodged-against-proprietor/articleshow/93627772.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.7814203420613127,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["soyabean oil","cooking oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","FIR lodged"],"locations":["Indore, Madhya Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Madhya Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"INDORE: Indore district administration on Wednesday collected samples of cooking oil from a wholesale shop and seized soyabean oil worth Rs 34,500 on suspicion adulteration. Acting on a complaint, collector Manish Singh...","search_text":"$1e9"},{"article_id":"oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","slug":"oil-8236cb0c375f7c7f","title":"Alcohol poisoning and edible oil fraud cases soar in India","source":"foodnavigator-asia.com","date":"2022-08-15","url":"https://www.foodnavigator-asia.com/Article/2022/08/15/alcohol-poisoning-and-edible-oil-fraud-cases-soar-in-india/","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.3646053693868905,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit"],"adulterants":["adulterated oil"],"actions":["confiscation"],"locations":["Rajasthan, India"],"primary_state":"Rajasthan","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":8,"excerpt":"India has been a hotspot for food and beverage adulteration cases over the past several years, covering a wide range of products from dairy to honey and more – and after the COVID-19 pandemic hit the region, alcohol...","search_text":"$1ea"},{"article_id":"c3aa82e4-0707-4514-a535-22d6d4a7f0b2","slug":"ghee-c3aa82e4-0707-4514-a535-22d6d4a7f0b2","title":"Khargone: 500-kg spurious ghee, 1,682-litre adulterated edible oil seized","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2022-07-30","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/indore/khargone-500-kg-spurious-ghee-1682-litre-adulterated-edible-oil-seized","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.77612912,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["spurious ghee"],"actions":["seizure","sealing"],"locations":["Khargone, Madhya Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Madhya Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"Khargone (Madhya Pradesh): In a major crackdown, a team of Khargone administration seized 500-kilogram spurious ghee along with 1,682-litre mix brand edible oil and other chemicals from Bamnala village, about...","search_text":"$1eb"},{"article_id":"oil-722884cee1da5016","slug":"oil-722884cee1da5016","title":"Ganj Basoda: Adulterated Oil surfaces in markets ahead of the festival season","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2022-07-29","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/bhopal/ganj-basoda-adulterated-oil-surfaces-in-markets-ahead-of-the-festival-season","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.7888174889564717,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution","mislabeling"],"adulterants":["adulterated oil"],"actions":[],"locations":["Ganj Basoda, Madhya Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Madhya Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":6,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Ganj Basoda (Madhya Pradesh): As the festival season is round the corner, the use of low quality and adulterated edible oils has again taken over in the eateries situated in several rural areas of the Ganjbasoda...","search_text":"$1ec"},{"article_id":"oil-4bd4c6831e9c7077","slug":"oil-4bd4c6831e9c7077","title":"Khargone: Edible oil worth Rs 50 lakh seized","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2022-06-22","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/indore/khargone-edible-oil-worth-rs-50-lakh-seized","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.4964872490839554,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["mislabeling","unsafe_food"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","raid"],"locations":["Khargone, Madhya Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Madhya Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Khargone (Madhya Pradesh): In a major crackdown on those involved in hoarding, a joint team of five departments led by deputy collector Omnarayan Singh conducted raids at shops and godowns of Gurukrupa Traders Bistan...","search_text":"$1ed"},{"article_id":"oil-9790eee6e00c0018","slug":"oil-9790eee6e00c0018","title":"tinsukia police: Tinsukia Police Bust Oil Adulteration Racket Arrest 4, One On The Run","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2022-06-05","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/guwahati/tinsukia-police-bust-oil-adulteration-racket-arrest-4-one-on-the-run/articleshow/92013793.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.355,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["condensate oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["condensate oil"],"actions":["arrest","seizure"],"locations":["Tinsukia, Assam, India"],"primary_state":"Assam","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"DIBRUGARH: Blowing the lid off a thriving adulterated oil racket in upper Assam, Tinsukia Police on Saturday arrested four persons and seized 14,000 litres of stolen condensate oil from Tinsukia and Dibrugarh districts....","search_text":"$1ee"},{"article_id":"8d8b9ba9-5da4-4861-89db-348400c8ef68","slug":"ghee-8d8b9ba9-5da4-4861-89db-348400c8ef68","title":"Detergent Found In Milk, Animal Fat In Ghee | Agra News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2022-05-26","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/agra/detergent-found-in-milk-animal-fat-in-ghee/articleshow/91801919.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["animal fat","petroleum jelly"],"actions":["license cancellation"],"locations":["Firozabad, Uttar Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Uttar Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":5,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"AGRA: Milk samples collected by the food safety and drug administration (FSDA) in Firozabad in January have been reported to be unsafe for human consumption after lab testing. The FSDA tested a sample of ghee to...","search_text":"$1ef"},{"article_id":"3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","slug":"ghee-3860086d-7db5-4a45-ac94-d58f08afd139","title":"Delhi: Two arrested for selling adulterated ghee","source":"indiasnews.net","date":"2022-04-11","url":"https://www.indiasnews.net/news/272468805/delhi-two-arrested-for-selling-adulterated-ghee","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution","counterfeit"],"adulterants":["duplicate ghee","refined oil","dalda"],"actions":["arrest","case registration","seizure"],"locations":["Delhi, Outer District, India"],"primary_state":"Delhi","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":15,"excerpt":"New Delhi [India], April 10 (ANI): Two people have been arrested in the outer district of Delhi along with 1,250 kg of adulterated ghee. Police said on Sunday that they were allegedly selling duplicate ghee in the...","search_text":"$1f0"},{"article_id":"2fe1bef6-e797-4d9f-bb5b-6f936d7a55dc","slug":"ghee-2fe1bef6-e797-4d9f-bb5b-6f936d7a55dc","title":"Fake ghee factory exposed in Delhi, 2 held with 1,259 litres of adulterated desi ghee of different brands","source":"india.com","date":"2022-04-11","url":"https://zeenews.india.com/india/fake-ghee-factory-exposed-in-delhi-2-held-with-1259-litres-of-adulterated-desi-ghee-of-different-brands-2452707.html","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit"],"adulterants":["fake ghee"],"actions":["arrest","seizure"],"locations":["Delhi, Outer Delhi, India"],"primary_state":"Delhi","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"New Delhi: Two men were arrested for allegedly selling adulterated desi ghee in outer Delhi, police said on Sunday (April 10, 2022). Anshul Bansal (22) and Arjun Kumar (30) were arrested and 1,259 litres of adulterated...","search_text":"$1f1"},{"article_id":"oil-85127f0bde3109d3","slug":"oil-85127f0bde3109d3","title":"Oil’s not well? Food safety teams smell fraud","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2022-04-04","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Hyderabad/oils-not-well-food-safety-teams-smell-fraud/article65290089.ece","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8715256357618476,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["old oil"],"actions":["sampling"],"locations":["Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":8,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"The Russia-Ukraine war has driven up the price of edible oil in India. Suspecting that the price rise may lead to sale of adulterated or substandard edible oil, Telangana Food Safety Authority teams conducted checks at...","search_text":"$1f2"},{"article_id":"oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0","slug":"oil-09a4e4c4bd7a4ed0","title":"Vigilance Continues Raids, Monitors Edible Oil Trade | Vijayawada News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2022-03-21","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/vijayawada/vigilance-continues-raids-monitors-edible-oil-trade/articleshow/90341966.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.4831315027247889,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":["spurious oil"],"actions":["registration of criminal cases"],"locations":["Vijayawada, Krishna, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Vijayawada: Vigilance and enforcement department additional director general Dr. S Bagchi said they are continuously monitoring the sale of edible oil considering the shortage due to the war in Ukraine. He said strict...","search_text":"$1f3"},{"article_id":"oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","slug":"oil-3aa9d09717e53c24","title":"Visakhapatnam: Traders find new ways to strike a deal","source":"thehansindia.com","date":"2022-03-12","url":"https://www.thehansindia.com/news/cities/visakhapatnam/visakhapatnam-traders-find-new-ways-to-strike-a-deal-733011","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.2845,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["mislabeling"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["raid","seizure","case_filed"],"locations":["Visakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"Visakhapatnam: With officials giving clear instructions not to sell edible oils above than the MRP (maximum retail price), wholesale dealers are looking for newer ways to hoodwink the officials and strike a deal. To...","search_text":"$1f4"},{"article_id":"oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","slug":"oil-f9acf1c32c4becc3","title":"Suspected adulterated oil","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2022-03-02","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Tiruchirapalli/food-safety-officials-crack-the-whip-on-adulteration-of-edible-oil-in-tiruchi/article65183634.ece","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.9306742881971514,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["groundnut oil","gingelly oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution","dilution"],"adulterants":["palm oil","rice bran oil"],"actions":["stop sale order"],"locations":["Woraiyur, India"],"accepted_triplet_count":5,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"Officials of the Food Safety Department have lifted samples of suspected adulterated groundnut and gingelly oil from a manufacturing-cum-packaging unit at Woraiyur in the city. Following inspection carried out by a team...","search_text":"$1f5"},{"article_id":"c7803b74-2f5d-47d0-a09e-c27ed98ec1a3","slug":"ghee-c7803b74-2f5d-47d0-a09e-c27ed98ec1a3","title":"3 shop owners among 4 booked for selling spurious ghee","source":"indianexpress.com","date":"2022-03-02","url":"https://indianexpress.com/article/cities/sas-nagar-mohali/3-shop-owners-among-4-booked-for-selling-spurious-ghee-7796747/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["booking"],"locations":["Matour, Punjab, India"],"primary_state":"Punjab","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"The Matour police booked four persons, including three shopkeepers, for selling adulterated desi ghee. Police also recovered ghee from the shops which were being run in Matour village. According to the police, the raid...","search_text":"$1f6"},{"article_id":"oil-08837290b8f04c6c","slug":"oil-08837290b8f04c6c","title":"Maha govt, FDA crack down on oil manufacturers to check on adulteration","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2022-01-28","url":"https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/industry/cons-products/food/maha-govt-fda-crack-down-on-oil-manufacturers-to-check-on-adulteration/articleshow/89178574.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.680249171962088,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["sunflower oil","palm oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["palm oil"],"actions":["raid"],"locations":["Mumbai, Navi Mumbai, Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":0,"excerpt":"The state department had raided a factory in Vashi area of Navi Mumbai on Tuesday, while the FDA conducted operations at units in Bhiwandi and Mira Road, the official said. The raids were conducted based on information...","search_text":"$1f7"},{"article_id":"68753b50-8fe7-4499-bb2d-ddfcc7e16c94","slug":"ghee-68753b50-8fe7-4499-bb2d-ddfcc7e16c94","title":"Nandini ghee adulteration racket case: Hunt on to nab prime accused: SP Chethan - Star of Mysore","source":"starofmysore.com","date":"2022-01-20","url":"https://starofmysore.com/nandini-ghee-adulteration-racket-case-hunt-on-to-nab-prime-accused-sp-chethan/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.79073466,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["arrest","search_operation"],"locations":["Mysore, Mysuru, Karnataka, India"],"primary_state":"Karnataka","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Mysore/Mysuru: The Police are continuing their search operation to trace and nab the two absconding prime accused in the Nandini ghee adulteration racket that was busted in the outskirts of city last month, said...","search_text":"$1f8"},{"article_id":"b6a4c3c9-311e-4a4f-beaf-d0012bbfbf51","slug":"ghee-b6a4c3c9-311e-4a4f-beaf-d0012bbfbf51","title":"Sale of adulterated Nandini ghee uncovered","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2022-01-08","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/bangalore/sale-of-adulterated-nandini-ghee-uncovered/article38197249.ece","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"RedHatAI/Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506-FP8","publication_status":"provisional","validation_confidence":null,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["lab_confirmed"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["FIR registered"],"locations":["Bengaluru, Karnataka, India, Bengaluru, Karnataka"],"primary_state":"Karnataka","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"The Additional Director of Karnataka Milk Federation (marketing) and his team uncovered a racket involving the sale of adulterated Nandini ghee. They zeroed in on a wholesale dealer in the city who was allegedly...","search_text":"$1f9"},{"article_id":"d7c49d74-0c9c-470b-94ad-c7ccaa111eaf","slug":"ghee-d7c49d74-0c9c-470b-94ad-c7ccaa111eaf","title":"Adulterated ghee racket busted in Hyderabad, 2 held","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2022-01-06","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/cities/hyderabad/2022/jan/06/adulterated-ghee-racket-busted-2-held-2403554.html","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["palmolein oil","vegetable fats"],"actions":["arrest","seizure"],"locations":["Hyderabad, Telangana, India"],"primary_state":"Telangana","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"HYDERABAD: An adulterated ghee supply racket was busted by South Zone Task Force and two businessmen from Maharashtra involved in the racket were arrested. Police seized 970 litres of adulterated ghee packed in Vijaya...","search_text":"$1fa"},{"article_id":"ea6c8861-7a39-4e19-8e71-58720131fa8d","slug":"ghee-ea6c8861-7a39-4e19-8e71-58720131fa8d","title":"Four arrested in Nandini ghee adulteration racket case","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2021-12-29","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/karnataka/four-arrested-in-nandini-ghee-adulteration-racket-case/article38059298.ece","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.87580771,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["vegetable cooking oil","flavouring","coloring agents"],"actions":["arrest","raid","seizure"],"locations":["Mysuru, Karnataka, India"],"primary_state":"Karnataka","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Four persons have been arrested in connection with the Nandini ghee adulteration racket, which was busted in Mysuru recently. Addressing a press conference here on Tuesday, Superintendent of Mysuru district police R....","search_text":"$1fb"},{"article_id":"897c7de9-ed19-4ee2-a2d5-85b75355519d","slug":"ghee-897c7de9-ed19-4ee2-a2d5-85b75355519d","title":"Mysuru: Four arrested in Nandini ghee racket | Mysuru News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2021-12-29","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/mysuru/mysuru-four-arrested-in-nandini-ghee-racket/articleshow/88559007.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.74040784,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["arrest"],"locations":["Mysuru, Karnataka, India"],"primary_state":"Karnataka","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"MYSURU: Nearly 12 days after locals and activists exposed a Nandini ghee adulteration racket in Hosahundi village on the city outskirts, police made a breakthrough by arresting four accused. Police said they suspect the...","search_text":"$1fc"},{"article_id":"8187d86e-f46c-4e26-8188-a4e7b31de2f6","slug":"ghee-8187d86e-f46c-4e26-8188-a4e7b31de2f6","title":"Nandini Ghee Adulteration Racket: Four arrested; Some more likely to be rounded off, says SP - Star of Mysore","source":"starofmysore.com","date":"2021-12-29","url":"https://starofmysore.com/nandini-ghee-adulteration-racket-four-arrested-some-more-likely-to-be-rounded-off-says-sp/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.84573855,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["vegetable cooking oil","flavouring","colouring agents"],"actions":["arrest","seizure"],"locations":["Mysuru, Karnataka, India"],"primary_state":"Karnataka","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":6,"excerpt":"No evidence so far about KMF or MyMUL officials being hand in glove Mysore/Mysuru: Two weeks after the public busted a massive Nandini ghee adulteration racket at Hosahundi village at the foot of Chamundi Hill with wide...","search_text":"$1fd"},{"article_id":"43e20f96-27cb-4f67-b7e5-6228aea8e7b6","slug":"ghee-43e20f96-27cb-4f67-b7e5-6228aea8e7b6","title":"MYMUL MD making false allegations against major Nandini brand ghee buyer","source":"thehansindia.com","date":"2021-12-24","url":"https://www.thehansindia.com/karnataka/mymul-md-making-false-allegations-against-major-nandini-brand-ghee-buyer-721502","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.70580896,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee","spurious ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit"],"adulterants":["spurious ghee"],"actions":["protest"],"locations":["Mysuru, Karnataka, India"],"primary_state":"Karnataka","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"Mysuru: Mysuru City Corporation (MCC) corporator M V Ramaprasad staged a protest at Chamundipuram Circle here on Friday accusing Mysuru Milk Union Limited (MYMUL) Managing Director B N Vijay Kumar of spoiling the good...","search_text":"$1fe"},{"article_id":"0ea7c6a7-d2c1-498f-aa00-f3fc942206ed","slug":"ghee-0ea7c6a7-d2c1-498f-aa00-f3fc942206ed","title":"Minister warns of attachment of properties of those involved in fake Nandini ghee racket - Star of Mysore","source":"starofmysore.com","date":"2021-12-22","url":"https://starofmysore.com/minister-warns-of-attachment-of-properties-of-those-involved-in-fake-nandini-ghee-racket/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.80157505,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit"],"adulterants":["colouring powders"],"actions":["raid","seizure"],"locations":["Mysuru, Karnataka, India"],"primary_state":"Karnataka","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":0,"excerpt":"Belagavi: Days after a fake Nandini ghee racket was busted in Mysuru, Co-operation Minister S.T. Somashekar said that the properties of those involved in selling fake Nandini ghee will be confiscated by the Government....","search_text":"$1ff"},{"article_id":"fdc662ec-5ed7-4d04-8993-6144ff01abc2","slug":"ghee-fdc662ec-5ed7-4d04-8993-6144ff01abc2","title":"Ghee adulteration ring busted, Karnataka Milk Federation officials reach Mysuru","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2021-12-17","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/karnataka/2021/dec/17/ghee-adulteration-ring-busted-karnataka-milk-federation-officials-reach-mysuru-2396443.html","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.93465616,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit"],"adulterants":["dalda","low quality edible oil"],"actions":["seizure","raid"],"locations":["Mysuru, Karnataka, India"],"primary_state":"Karnataka","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":9,"excerpt":"MYSURU: In a major catch, a ghee adulteration racket was unearthed and ghee worth lakhs of rupees was seized in the city on Thursday. Acting on suspicion members of Human Rights Committee, an organisation led by its...","search_text":"$200"},{"article_id":"eec20343-5ffa-486c-b431-59ca5e4568d4","slug":"ghee-eec20343-5ffa-486c-b431-59ca5e4568d4","title":"Mymul to set up vigilance squad to tackle fake products","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2021-12-17","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/karnataka/mymul-to-set-up-vigilance-squad-to-tackle-fake-products/article37978551.ece","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.67683693,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee","palm oil","vegetable cooking oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit"],"adulterants":["palm oil","vegetable cooking oil","colouring","flavouring agents"],"actions":["FIR registered","vigilance squad set up","seizure"],"locations":["Mysuru, Karnataka, India"],"primary_state":"Karnataka","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"A day after a fake Nandini ghee racket was unearthed in Mysuru, the Mysuru District Co-operative Milk Producers’ Societies’ Union Limited (MYMUL) has decided to set up a vigilance squad to counter the distribution of...","search_text":"$201"},{"article_id":"36a70fc6-de5a-494c-9dc5-801fe7a7a53d","slug":"ghee-36a70fc6-de5a-494c-9dc5-801fe7a7a53d","title":"Adulterated Nandini ghee racket case: Adulterated ghee has inter-State ramifications - Star of Mysore","source":"starofmysore.com","date":"2021-12-17","url":"https://starofmysore.com/adulterated-nandini-ghee-racket-case-adulterated-ghee-has-inter-state-ramifications/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit"],"adulterants":["vegetable oil","edible oil"],"actions":["raid","case booked"],"locations":["Mysuru, Karnataka, India"],"primary_state":"Karnataka","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":5,"excerpt":"Racketeers cashed-in on huge popularity of Nandini ghee Mysore/Mysuru: The major adulterated Nandini ghee racket flourishing in Mysuru at a rented godown in Hosahundi at the foot of Chamundi Hill near Bandipalya has...","search_text":"$202"},{"article_id":"b3e58970-8bf0-4e37-a8f9-dd4fce60bf46","slug":"ghee-b3e58970-8bf0-4e37-a8f9-dd4fce60bf46","title":"Racket selling adulterated Nandini ghee busted - Star of Mysore","source":"starofmysore.com","date":"2021-12-16","url":"https://starofmysore.com/racket-selling-adulterated-nandini-ghee-busted/","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.91347255,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit"],"adulterants":["oil coloured with turmeric"],"actions":["raid","seizure"],"locations":["Mysore, Mysuru, Karnataka, India"],"primary_state":"Karnataka","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":10,"excerpt":"Mysore/Mysuru: A racket that manufactured and distributed adulterated Nandini brand ghee of Karnataka Milk Federation (KMF) has been busted in the city this morning and the godown has been raided. KMF officials and...","search_text":"$203"},{"article_id":"oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","slug":"oil-73603e3fbe5b2e10","title":"185 spurious mustard oil cans seized in Burrabazar | Kolkata News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2021-11-27","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/kolkata/185-spurious-mustard-oil-cans-seized-in-burrabazar/articleshow/87938067.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8510212505655528,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["mustard oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution"],"adulterants":["rice bran oil"],"actions":["raid","seizure","detention"],"locations":["Kolkata, West Bengal, India"],"primary_state":"West Bengal","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":18,"excerpt":"KOLKATA: The enforcement branch has raided the premises of three edible oil traders in the Posta region after receiving complaints that they were blending rice bran oil with deadly dyes and chemicals and repacking them...","search_text":"$204"},{"article_id":"oil-bd1df718191f8f6e","slug":"oil-bd1df718191f8f6e","title":"Tribunal slaps Rs 2 lakh fine on oil producer","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2021-11-06","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/cities/thiruvananthapuram/2021/nov/06/tribunal-slaps-rs-2-lakh-fine-on-oil-producer-2380042.html","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["unclear"],"food_items":["coconut oil"],"issue_types":["substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["Rs 2 lakh fine"],"locations":["Kunnathunadu panchayat, Ernakulam, Kerala, India"],"primary_state":"Kerala","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: The Food Safety Appellate Tribunal here has upheld the Rs 2-lakh fine that was imposed on a coconut oil manufacturer for selling substandard oil. The order was issued by judge S Sajikumar. The case...","search_text":"$205"},{"article_id":"oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","slug":"oil-d2df8ab69303fb55","title":"FDA urges caution while buying Diwali sweets","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2021-10-27","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/kolhapur/fda-urges-caution-while-buying-diwali-sweets/articleshow/87286991.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["cooking oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["raid","seizure"],"locations":["Sangli, Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"Kolhapur: The Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) has urged citizens to be on the alert while purchasing and consuming snacks and sweets during Diwali.The FDA said it would conduct a campaign against those found making...","search_text":"$206"},{"article_id":"cfa001c3-f0fc-45cd-8a71-3e35d2026e1f","slug":"ghee-cfa001c3-f0fc-45cd-8a71-3e35d2026e1f","title":"Rajasthan: Fatty acid profile new test to check spurious ghee | Jaipur News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2021-10-18","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/jaipur/fatty-acid-profile-new-test-to-check-spurious-ghee/articleshow/87092330.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.55775707,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["vanaspati oil"],"actions":["mandatory fatty acid profile test"],"locations":["Jaipur, Ajmer, Rajasthan, India"],"primary_state":"Rajasthan","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"JAIPUR: Miscreants producing adulterated desi ghee using vanaspati oil are selling their product in very cheap prices ranging from Rs 250-350 per litre. They have become notorious as they use certain chemicals which...","search_text":"$207"},{"article_id":"oil-66b89ef48f4536a9","slug":"oil-66b89ef48f4536a9","title":"Indore: In ongoing war against adulteration, 3K lt edible oil seized from two units","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2021-09-26","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/indore/indore-in-ongoing-war-against-adulteration-3k-lt-edible-oil-seizedfrom-two-units","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.752403651074907,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["raid","seizure"],"locations":["Indore, Madhya Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Madhya Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Indore A joint team of Crime Branch and Food and Civil Supply department raided two oil packaging units in Palda area on suspicion that they were adulterating edibile oil. In all 3,000 litres of oil was seized from the...","search_text":"$208"},{"article_id":"oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","slug":"oil-f6b072d5d5fbfb2a","title":"With pics - Arsh – FCS + FCS2 STRAP: Drive against ‘adulteration mafia’ in Indore: District FCS raids edible oil factory, petrol pump","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2021-09-25","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/indore/with-pics-arsh-fcs-fcs2strapdrive-against-adulteration-mafia-in-indore-district-fcs-raids-edible-oil-factory-petrol-pump","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.7114987760993686,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil","mustard oil","groundnut oil","soybean oil","sunflower oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substandard","mislabeling"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","raid"],"locations":["Indore, Madhya Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Madhya Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"Indore: A team of the District Food and Civil Supply led by additional collector Abhay Bedekar, in a drive against ‘adulteration mafia’, conducted two drives in two areas under the Indore department jurisdiction on...","search_text":"$209"},{"article_id":"634a0a0f-0899-427f-9396-6cc3c5442643","slug":"ghee-634a0a0f-0899-427f-9396-6cc3c5442643","title":"Madhya Pradesh: Expired ghee, tea leafs worth over Rs 8 lakh seized, manager and owner booked","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2021-09-23","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/indore/madhya-pradesh-expired-ghee-tea-leafs-worth-over-rs-8-lakh-seized-manager-and-owner-booked","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.34329364,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","mislabeling","substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","case registration"],"locations":["Indore, Madhya Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Madhya Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":7,"excerpt":"Indore (Madhya Pradesh): Continuing the action against spurious edibles, a joint team of Crime Branch and Food and Drug Administration Department raided Tradezo Company’s godown at Lasudia Mori and seized over 656...","search_text":"$20a"},{"article_id":"f62defd3-7975-4edf-8f34-40a36b487ac8","slug":"ghee-f62defd3-7975-4edf-8f34-40a36b487ac8","title":"Indore: Sub-standard ghee, tea leaves seized","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2021-09-22","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/indore/indore-sub-standard-ghee-tea-leaves-seized","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","mislabeling"],"adulterants":["expired ghee"],"actions":["raid","seizure","booking under IPC"],"locations":["Indore, Madhya Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Madhya Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Indore: A joint team of the Crime Branch and Food and Drug Administration Department raided the Shri Ram Food Dairy Industry in Palda and seized over 4,200 kilogram of sub-standard ghee worth Rs 18-20 lakh on Tuesday....","search_text":"$20b"},{"article_id":"oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","slug":"oil-9ab1d36fc93cf95c","title":"Kurnool police arrest five member gang involved in selling fake oils and tea powders using fake labels of top FMCGs","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2021-09-06","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/amaravati/kurnool-police-arrest-five-member-gang-involved-in-selling-fake-oils-and-tea-powders-using-fake-labels-of-top-fmcgs/articleshow/85978555.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.5533,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["coconut oil"],"issue_types":["counterfeit","mislabeling"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["arrest","seizure","case registration"],"locations":["Kurnool, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"TIRUPATI: Kurnool district police wing busted a five member gang involved in selling spurious products in large quantities using fake labels on Monday. The gang was involved in selling away fake coconut oils and tea...","search_text":"$20c"},{"article_id":"oil-f96a10806285c261","slug":"oil-f96a10806285c261","title":"Three of family die of dropsy over 10 days","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2021-08-06","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/rajkot/three-of-family-die-of-dropsy-over-10-days/articleshow/85079434.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.92,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.3388,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["mustard oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","unsafe_food"],"adulterants":["adulterated mustard oil"],"actions":[],"locations":["Palanpur, Banaskantha, Gujarat, India"],"primary_state":"Gujarat","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"Palanpur: Three out of seven members of a family who had suffered from food poisoning last month in Kundi village of Dhanera have died over the last 10 days, said medical officer of Banaskantha on Thursday. Epidemic...","search_text":"$20d"},{"article_id":"oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","slug":"oil-e8284ce4427f4e60","title":"Indore: Edible oil worth Rs 9.90L seized from Palda area, 11 samples taken from factory","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2021-07-23","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/indore/indore-edible-oil-worth-rs-990l-seized-from-palda-area-11-samples-taken-from-factory","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.6592694272791453,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["edible oil","surya coconut oil","halo refined sunflower oil","halo refined soyabean oil","siddha baba refined soyabean oil"],"issue_types":["mislabeling","substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","inspection"],"locations":["Indore, Madhya Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Madhya Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":9,"excerpt":"Indore: A team of food and drug administration department conducted a surprise inspection of an edible oil repacking factory in the Palda area on Friday and found that the FSSAI number of the oil, imported from Nepal,...","search_text":"$20e"},{"article_id":"oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba","slug":"oil-dbc8c7a43b8925ba","title":"Madhya Pradesh: Pulse mills, hotels and grocery shops inspected; samples collected for testing","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2021-07-17","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/indore/madhya-pradesh-pulse-mills-hotels-and-grocery-shops-inspected-samples-collected-for-testing","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["cooking oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","contamination"],"adulterants":["total polar materials"],"actions":["destroyed"],"locations":["Barwani, Madhya Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Madhya Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Guna: District administration Guna, a joint team of food and revenue department conducted raids on big hotels and factories of Guna city on Friday. The team inspected Sanjay Dal Mill, Ved Dal Mill and Deepak Dal Mill in...","search_text":"$20f"},{"article_id":"oil-f5b6386895404f0b","slug":"oil-f5b6386895404f0b","title":"Epidemic dropsy claims two lives in Gujarat's Banaskantha","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2021-06-19","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/rajkot/dropsy-claims-two-lives-in-banaskantha/articleshow/83648909.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.85,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.7722,"classifier_model":"Weighted ensemble: TF-IDF Linear SVM + BGE-large RBF-SVM + RoBERTa-base","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["mustard oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","contamination"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["medical observation"],"locations":["Gundri, Banaskantha, Gujarat, India"],"primary_state":"Gujarat","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"PALANPUR: Two women died and six others of their family fell ill reportedly after consuming adulterated mustard oil in Gundri village of Banaskantha’s Dantiwada taluka. All of them are suspected to have suffered from...","search_text":"$210"},{"article_id":"oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","slug":"oil-5ac9372e2a178a90","title":"Nagpur: Adulterated edible oil racket busted, 3 booked | Nagpur News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2021-06-17","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/nagpur/adulterated-edible-oil-racket-busted-3-booked/articleshow/83588940.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.8942772848383711,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["edible oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit","mislabeling"],"adulterants":["impure edible oil"],"actions":["booking of three persons","seizure of adulterated oil"],"locations":["Nagpur, Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"NAGPUR: Tehsil police on Tuesday busted an adulterated edible oil manufacturing unit and booked three persons in this connection. The cops led by senior PI Jayesh Bhandarkar also seized a huge quantity of adulterated...","search_text":"$211"},{"article_id":"a6385d09-ca9d-4f95-b5ba-4f50630bec35","slug":"ghee-a6385d09-ca9d-4f95-b5ba-4f50630bec35","title":"Ghee adulteration racket busted in Prakasam, 3 held","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2021-06-12","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/andhra-pradesh/2021/jun/12/ghee-adulteration-racket-busted-in-prakasam-3-held-2315181.html","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["palm oil"],"actions":["arrest","seizure"],"locations":["Ongole, Prakasam, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"ONGOLE: The Prakasam police have busted a ghee adulteration racket and arrested three persons. The police seized around 10,000 kg Palmolive oil tins, around 1,000 litres of adulterated ghee stock, adulterated chilli...","search_text":"$212"},{"article_id":"oil-4877f76e174824e5","slug":"oil-4877f76e174824e5","title":"Patanjali mustard oil found to be of substandard food quality: Rajasthan govt","source":"indiatoday.in","date":"2021-06-10","url":"https://www.indiatoday.in/india/rajasthan/story/patanjali-mustard-oil-substandard-quality-rajasthan-govt-1812995-2021-06-10?utm_source=rss","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.7685099387027947,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["mustard oil"],"issue_types":["substandard"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["raid on Singhania oil mill"],"locations":["Alwar, Rajasthan, India"],"primary_state":"Rajasthan","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"Patanjali mustard oil found to be of substandard food quality: Rajasthan govt According to the Rajasthan government, mustard oil sold by Baba Ramdev's company Patanjali has been found to be substandard by the Food...","search_text":"$213"},{"article_id":"oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","slug":"oil-a776d4d8a8c71497","title":"Adulteration in edible oil detected ","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2021-04-22","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Tiruchirapalli/adulteration-in-edible-oil-detected/article34386473.ece","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.942019995967352,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["refined sunflower oil","palm oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution","mislabeling"],"adulterants":["palm oil"],"actions":["suspend operations","seizure"],"locations":["Tiruchi, Tamil Nadu, India"],"primary_state":"Tamil Nadu","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"Food Safety officials on Thursday ordered a edible oil packaging unit at Sangilandapuram in the city to suspend operations after they detected a case of suspected adulteration. The officials led by R. Ramesh Babu,...","search_text":"$214"},{"article_id":"57b2326c-e877-4995-82fc-221eda139718","slug":"ghee-57b2326c-e877-4995-82fc-221eda139718","title":"Food safety officials conduct raids on restaurants, ghee units in Vijayawada","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2021-04-07","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/cities/vijayawada/2021/apr/07/food-safety-officials-conduct-raids-on-restaurants-ghee-units-invijayawada-2286873.html","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.77578443,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["palmoline oil"],"actions":["surprise raids","seizure"],"locations":["Vijayawada, Andhra Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Andhra Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":1,"excerpt":"VIJAYAWADA: Sleuths of Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) along with Vigilance officials conducted surprise raids on various restaurants and ghee manufacturing units in Vijayawada on Tuesday. It is...","search_text":"$215"},{"article_id":"23a5dd2a-a53c-44b8-8b86-37e04d4cf1ee","slug":"ghee-23a5dd2a-a53c-44b8-8b86-37e04d4cf1ee","title":"Ghee, oil manufacturing units in city raided","source":"thehindu.com","date":"2021-04-07","url":"https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Visakhapatnam/ghee-oil-manufacturing-units-in-city-raided/article34259509.ece","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.9,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.80196154,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee","edible oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["sub-standard raw material"],"actions":["raid","inspection","sample collection"],"locations":["India"],"accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":0,"excerpt":"In a joint operation, officials of the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), along with Vigilance and Enforcement (V&E) and Revenue departments, conducted raids on various spices, ghee and oil...","search_text":"$216"},{"article_id":"oil-13fd5c31e278a577","slug":"oil-13fd5c31e278a577","title":"Adulteration found in paneer, mustard oil & honey in Doon | Dehradun News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2021-03-23","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/dehradun/adulteration-found-in-paneer-mustard-oil-honey-in-doon/articleshow/81638388.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.4492838459400656,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["unclear"],"food_items":["mustard oil"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":[],"actions":[],"locations":["Dehradun, Uttarakhand, India"],"primary_state":"Uttarakhand","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"DEHRADUN: The district food and drug department on Monday received quality test reports of 19 food items, the samples of which were collected from the state capital in the last two months. According to the reports,...","search_text":"$217"},{"article_id":"oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","slug":"oil-7885df1b5e223e8b","title":"Mumbai: Over 50% edible oils seized in raids found non-certified","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2021-02-02","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/mumbai/mumbai-over-50-edible-oils-seized-in-raids-found-non-certified","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.7366998079318416,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["pending_test"],"food_items":["mustard oil","peanut oil","sunflower oil","palm oil"],"issue_types":["substandard","mislabeling"],"adulterants":[],"actions":["seizure","inspection"],"locations":["Mumbai, Thane, Maharashtra, India"],"primary_state":"Maharashtra","accepted_triplet_count":4,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"More than 50 per cent of edible oils seized by the Food and Drug Administration in Thane and Mumbai during raids last month have been found to be non-certified, the FDA has said. Raids were conducted on eight...","search_text":"$218"},{"article_id":"504dd102-6089-4fcb-a066-0006720862a7","slug":"ghee-504dd102-6089-4fcb-a066-0006720862a7","title":"Another fake ghee and honey making unit busted in Cuttack","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2021-01-31","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/odisha/2021/jan/31/another-fake-ghee-and-honey-making-unit-busted-in-cuttack-2257497.html","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","unsafe_food"],"adulterants":["adulterated ghee"],"actions":["raid","seizure","detention"],"locations":["Cuttack, Odisha, India"],"primary_state":"Odisha","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"CUTTACK: Continuing its crackdown on the manufacture and sale of adulterated food items in the city, Commissionerate Police on Saturday busted another fake ghee and honey making unit in CDA Sector-9. Police also seized...","search_text":"$219"},{"article_id":"d18985ea-8239-498e-9147-eda1d0bb8bde","slug":"ghee-d18985ea-8239-498e-9147-eda1d0bb8bde","title":"KHANDWA: Over 1,300 kilograms of ingredients used in making spurious ghee seized, factory sealed in Chhirkhel village, 4 arrested","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2021-01-29","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/indore/khandwa-over-1300-kg-ingredients-used-in-making-spurious-ghee-seized-factory-sealed-in-chhirkhel-village-4-arrested","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["Colgate","Dabur toothpaste","Lal Dant Manjan"],"actions":["arrest","seizure","factory sealed","case registered"],"locations":["Khandwa, Madhya Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Madhya Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":8,"excerpt":"Khandwa: Four persons have been arrested in connection with making spurious ghee at a factory in Chhirkhel village. It was joint raid of Chhegaon Makhan and Padamnagar police conducted under anti-adulteration campaign...","search_text":"$21a"},{"article_id":"6f4adcf4-c63b-41c9-b7f6-0b0f4e75c857","slug":"ghee-6f4adcf4-c63b-41c9-b7f6-0b0f4e75c857","title":"Duplicate ghee making unit busted | Surat News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2021-01-26","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/surat/duplicate-ghee-making-unit-busted/articleshow/80454439.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit"],"adulterants":["duplicate ghee"],"actions":["arrest","seizure","raid"],"locations":["Surat, Gujarat, India"],"primary_state":"Gujarat","accepted_triplet_count":1,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":3,"excerpt":"Surat: Police busted a duplicate ghee manufacturing and distribution racket in Sarthana area on Monday and seized ghee and vehicles worth Rs 19 lakh. Five persons were also arrested for running the racket. They were...","search_text":"$21b"},{"article_id":"oil-f138f57de764f810","slug":"oil-f138f57de764f810","title":"Madhya Pradesh: Oil factory owner in Indore arrested for packing palm oil in branded soyabean oil packets","source":"freepressjournal.in","date":"2021-01-09","url":"https://www.freepressjournal.in/indore/madhya-pradesh-oil-factory-owner-in-indore-arrested-for-packing-palm-oil-in-branded-soyabean-oil-packets","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"irrelevant","classifier_score":0.2412010330769901,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["soyabean oil","palm oil"],"issue_types":["substitution","mislabeling","substandard"],"adulterants":["palm oil"],"actions":["arrest","case_registered"],"locations":["Indore, Madhya Pradesh, India"],"primary_state":"Madhya Pradesh","accepted_triplet_count":2,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Indore: An oil factory owner was arrested for packing palm oil in the packets of different brands of soyabean and other vegetable oils in Palda area late on Friday. The joint team of food department and administration...","search_text":"$21c"},{"article_id":"c8ddee14-df38-49aa-9d85-a7c6b34273a6","slug":"ghee-c8ddee14-df38-49aa-9d85-a7c6b34273a6","title":"Poison on the plate: Markets see rise in fake food products","source":"newindianexpress.com","date":"2021-01-08","url":"https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/odisha/2021/jan/08/poison-on-the-plate-markets-see-rise-in-fake-food-products-2247212.html","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.55965225,"classifier_model":"ghee_relevance_tfidf_minilm_ensemble_v1","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration"],"adulterants":["palm oil","vanaspati","yellow chemical colour"],"actions":["raids"],"locations":["Cuttack, Odisha, India"],"primary_state":"Odisha","accepted_triplet_count":17,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":2,"excerpt":"BHUBANESWAR: You eat with your eyes first, goes an adage. But going just by the looks of it may prove fatal considering the extent of spurious food that have made their way into the open markets, particularly from...","search_text":"$21d"},{"article_id":"15f9d255-f348-4fb7-ba3d-003ab6adcfb2","slug":"ghee-15f9d255-f348-4fb7-ba3d-003ab6adcfb2","title":"Duplicate ghee making unit busted in Rander | Surat News - Times of India","source":"indiatimes.com","date":"2021-01-08","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/surat/duplicate-ghee-making-unit-busted-in-rander/articleshow/80158534.cms","food_category":"Ghee","model_label":"relevant_event","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["alleged"],"food_items":["ghee","sunflower oil","vegetable ghee"],"issue_types":["adulteration","counterfeit"],"adulterants":["sunflower oil","vegetable ghee","ghee flavour","yellow colour"],"actions":["raid","arrest","seizure"],"locations":["Surat, Gujarat, India"],"primary_state":"Gujarat","accepted_triplet_count":3,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Surat: The prevention of crime branch (PCB) sleuths busted a duplicate ghee and oil making racket in Rander and seized over 358 kg products. Police arrested three persons from the raided warehouse while two others...","search_text":"$21e"},{"article_id":"oil-992710122346e1a9","slug":"oil-992710122346e1a9","title":"15000 litres of adulterated cooking oil seized by FSSAI","source":"timesofindia.indiatimes.com","date":"2019-07-01","url":"https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/life-style/food-news/15000-litres-of-adulterated-cooking-oil-seized-by-fssai/photostory/70872567.cms","food_category":"Edible Oil","model_label":"unclear","source_model":"Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B-FP8","publication_status":"validated","validation_confidence":0.95,"classifier_label":"relevant","classifier_score":0.820154357945758,"classifier_model":"ens_wavg[tfidf_linsvm/full+bge-large_rbfsvm/oilemb+roberta-base_lead_512/full|0.17,0.67,0.17]","event_count":1,"claim_statuses":["suspected"],"food_items":["groundnut oil","coconut oil","sunflower oil","refined palm olein"],"issue_types":["adulteration","substitution","dilution"],"adulterants":["refined palm olein"],"actions":["seizure","warehouse sealed"],"locations":["Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India"],"primary_state":"Tamil Nadu","accepted_triplet_count":0,"schema_gap_count":0,"unresolved_triplet_count":4,"excerpt":"Adulteration of food is a major concern in most third world countries, and India is no stranger to it. A lot of food products are mixed with foreign agents for a variety of reasons. Milk is often mixed with water, milk...","search_text":"$21f"}]}]}]],["$L220"],"$L221"]}],"isPartial":false,"staleTime":300,"varyParams":null,"buildId":"0ifx137sa9Idv3Z-A8PaH"}
220:["$","script","script-0",{"src":"/FoodComputing/_next/static/chunks/0p_14p4t4moso.js","async":true}]
221:["$","$L222",null,{"children":["$","$223",null,{"name":"Next.MetadataOutlet","children":"$@224"}]}]
224:null
