Maggots found in FDA’s inspection in Mumbai’s Bademiya; Krishna Fastfood, Paradise Home Kitchen fined
During their inspection earlier this week, the FDA found that Krishna Fastfood and Paradise Home Kitchen had violated several food safety norms, including dirty kitchens.
The FDA’s recent inspection of hotels has exposed long-neglected food safety concerns in Mumbai, India’s financial capital, which has over 18,000 registered eateries. Following the discovery of cockroaches, rats and maggots, the FDA sealed three outlets of the iconic eatery, Bademiya, in Colaba. Furthermore, two restaurants, Krishna Fastfood in Charkop and Paradise Home Kitchen in Bandra, have been fined for violating hygiene safety regulations.
During their inspection earlier this week, the FDA found that Krishna Fastfood and Paradise Home Kitchen had violated several food safety norms, including dirty kitchens. Krishna Fastfood was fined Rs 15,000, while Paradise Home Kitchen was slapped a Rs 40,000 fine. An FDA officer explained, “There were several parameters under which they were fined, such as the unhygienic cooking space. We have collected samples from each of the restaurants for quality analysis, which will be sent to the laboratory.”
“In over 90 percent of the cases, the restaurants don’t have adequate documents as many employees don’t have medical certificates,” added the officer.
Sailesh Adhav, joint commissioner, FDA, confirmed it.
Two other restaurants, Mumbai Darbar in Mahim and cloud kitchen outlet Hyprkytchen Foodtech Private Limited in Govandi, have been ordered to close. The FDA has also filed an FIR against Mumbai Darbar for defying a stop-work order. The restaurant’s operations will remain suspended until the issues are rectified, and the management submits a thorough compliance report.
Highlighting severe food safety violations, the officer mentioned the presence of cockroaches, rats, maggots, and stale vegetables during the inspection at three outlets in Bademiya. “It was also shocking for us to find maggots inside the restaurants,” said the officer.
“As these establishments were found to operate without a valid food licence, and discrepancies were identified during the inspections, it has been directed that they cease their food business operations until they obtain a valid food safety and standards licence and rectify the identified discrepancies,” read the statement released by FDA.
The FDA also collected ten samples for analysis that includes paneer, marinated chicken with masala, chilli powder (loose), chilli powder (without label), turmeric powder (without label), jeera (without label), kacchi ghani mustard oil (Hathi Brand), curd, chicken biryani (prepared food), and chicken kabab (Prepared Food) for analysis.
This inspection has raised concerns about how thousands of eateries in Mumbai serve both locals and foreigners while violating basic food safety standards. To address this issue, the FDA has partnered with the Indian Hotel and Restaurant Association (AHAR) to conduct workshops aimed at raising awareness about food safety and cleanliness among hotel owners.
“So far, four to five workshops have been conducted, covering topics such as maintaining cleanliness, staff fitness certification, and dress codes, among others,” said an FDA officer.
Sudhakar Shetty, the Secretary of AHAR, welcomed the FDA’s ongoing inspection and emphasized the importance of complying with food safety regulations. He stated, “While obtaining a licence for hotels is compulsory, many do not take it, indicating a lack of fear of the law. We advise all our members to undergo hygiene ratings. FDA officials also brief members on regulations during meetings. Some individuals strictly adhere to the regulations, while others may think they can deal with them when inspections occur. Such an attitude is entirely wrong, and AHAR does not support it.” AHAR membership is granted only to those with FSSAI and BMC licences.
The scrutiny comes in the wake of a disturbing incident reported on August 13, when a customer at Papa Pancho Da Dhaba, in Bandra discovered a dead mouse in a chicken dish. Following which a police complaint was filed, leading to charges of food adulteration and endangerment of human life. Responding promptly, the FDA initiated an investigation into the matter.
To avoid such instances, the FDA launched a special campaign to inspect hotels across all 13 zones in Mumbai from September. Over the course of 12 days, a total of 68 hotels were thoroughly examined, revealing regulatory violations in all of them.